*SECTION 1.*

*This measure shall be known and may be cited as "The California Privacy
Rights Act of 2020."*

*SEC. 2. Findings and Declarations.*

*The People of the State of California hereby find and declare all of
the following:*

*A. In 1972, California voters amended the California Constitution to
include the right of privacy among the \"inalienable\" rights of all
people. Voters acted in response to the accelerating encroachment on
personal freedom and security caused by increased data collection and
usage in contemporary society. The amendment established a legal and
enforceable constitutional right of privacy for every Californian.
Fundamental to this right of privacy is the ability of individuals to
control the use, including the sale, of their personal information.*

*B. Since California voters approved the constitutional right of
privacy, the California Legislature has adopted specific mechanisms to
safeguard Californians\' privacy, including the Online Privacy
Protection Act, the Privacy Rights for California Minors in the Digital
World Act, and Shine the Light, but consumers had no right to learn what
personal information a business had collected about them and how they
used it or to direct businesses not to sell the consumer\'s personal
information.*

*C. That changed in 2018, when more than 629,000 California voters
signed petitions to qualify the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018
for the ballot. In response to the measure\'s qualification, the
Legislature enacted the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 (CCPA)
into law. The CCPA gives California consumers the right to learn what
information a business has collected about them, to delete their
personal information, to stop businesses from selling their personal
information, including using it to target them with ads that follow them
as they browse the internet from one website to another, and to hold
businesses accountable if they do not take reasonable steps to safeguard
their personal information.*

*D. Even before the CCPA had gone into effect, the Legislature
considered many bills in 2019 to amend the law, some of which would have
significantly weakened it. Unless California voters take action, the
hard-fought rights consumers have won could be undermined by future
legislation.*

*E. Rather than diluting privacy rights, California should strengthen
them over time. Many businesses collect and use consumers\' personal
information, sometimes without consumers\' knowledge regarding the
business\'s use and retention of their personal information. In
practice, consumers are often entering into a form of contractual
arrangement in which while they do not pay money for a good or service,
they exchange access to that good or service in return for access to
their attention, or access to their personal information. Because the
value of the personal information they are exchanging for the good or
service is often opaque, depending on the practices of the business,
consumers often have no good way to value the transaction. In addition,
the terms of agreement or policies in which the arrangements are spelled
out, are often complex, unclear, and as a result most consumers never
have the time to read or understand them.*

*F. This asymmetry of information makes it difficult for consumers to
understand what they are exchanging and therefore to negotiate
effectively with businesses. Unlike in other areas of the economy where
consumers can comparison shop, or can understand at a glance if a good
or service is expensive or affordable, it is hard for the consumer to
know how much his or her information is worth to any given business,
when data use practices vary so widely between businesses.*

*G. The State therefore has an interest in mandating laws that will
allow consumers to understand more fully how their information is being
used, and for what purposes. In the same way that ingredient labels on
foods help consumers shop more effectively, disclosure around data
management practices will help consumers become more informed
counterparties in the data economy, and promote competition,
Additionally, if a consumer can tell a business not to sell his or her
data, then that consumer will not have to scour a privacy policy to see
whether the business is, in fact, selling that data, and the resulting
savings in time is worth, in the aggregate, a tremendous amount of
money.*

*H. Consumers need stronger laws to place them on a more equal footing
when negotiating with businesses in order to protect their rights,
Consumers should be entitled to a clear explanation of the uses of their
personal information, including how it is used for advertising, and to
control, correct, or delete it, including by allowing consumers to limit
businesses\' use of their sensitive personal information to help guard
against identity theft, to opt-out of the sale and sharing of their
personal information, and to request that businesses correct inaccurate
information about them.*

*I. California is the world leader in many new technologies that have
reshaped our society. The world today is unimaginable without the
internet, one of the most momentous inventions in human history, and the
new services and businesses that arose on top of it \-- many of which
were invented here in California. One of the most successful business
models for the internet has been services that rely on advertising to
make money as opposed to charging consumers a fee. Advertising-supported
services have existed for generations, and can be a great model for
consumers and businesses alike. However, some advertising businesses
today use technologies and tools that are opaque to consumers to collect
and trade vast amounts of personal information, to track them across the
internet, and to create detailed profiles of their individual interests.
Some companies that do not charge consumers a fee, subsidize these
services by monetizing consumers\' personal information. Consumers
should have the information and tools necessary to limit the use of
their information to non-invasive, pro-privacy advertising, where their
personal information is not sold to or shared with hundreds of
businesses they\'ve never heard of, If they choose to do so. Absent
these tools, it will be virtually impossible for consumers to fully
understand these contracts they are essentially entering into when they
interact with various businesses.*

*J. Children are particularly vulnerable from a negotiating perspective
with respect to their privacy rights. Parents should be able to control
what information is collected and sold or shared about their young
children and should be given the right to demand that companies erase
information collected about their children.*

*K. Business should also be held directly accountable to consumers for
data security breaches and notify consumers when their most sensitive
information has been compromised,*

*L. An independent watchdog whose mission is to protect consumer privacy
should ensure that businesses and consumers are well-informed about
their rights and obligations and should vigorously enforce the law
against businesses that violate consumers\' privacy rights.*

*SEC. 3. Purpose and Intent.*

*In enacting this Act, it is the purpose and intent of the people of the
State of California to further protect consumers\' rights, including the
constitutional right of privacy. The implementation of this Act shall be
guided by the following principles:*

*A. Consumer Rights*

*1. Consumers should know who is collecting their personal information
and that of their children, how it is being used, and to whom it is
disclosed, so that they have the information necessary to exercise
meaningful control over businesses\' use of their personal information
and that of their children.*

*2. Consumers should be able to control the use of their personal
information, including limiting the use of their sensitive personal
information, the unauthorized use or disclosure of which creates a
heightened risk of harm to the consumer, and they should have meaningful
options over how it is collected, used, and disclosed.*

*3. Consumers should have access to their personal information and
should be able to correct it, delete it, and take it with them from one
business to another.*

*4. Consumers or their authorized agents should be able to exercise
these options through easily accessible self-serve tools.*

*5. Consumers should be able to exercise these rights without being
penalized for doing so.*

*6. Consumers should be able to hold businesses accountable for falling
to take reasonable precautions to protect their most sensitive personal
information from hackers and security breaches.*

*7. Consumers should benefit from businesses\' use of their personal
information.*

*8. The privacy interests of employees and independent contractors
should also be protected, taking into account the differences in the
relationship between employees or independent contractors and
businesses, as compared to the relationship between consumers and
businesses. In addition, this law is not intended to interfere with the
right to organize and collective bargaining under the National Labor
Relations Act. It is the purpose and intent of the Act to extend the
exemptions in this title for employee and business to business
communications until January 1, 2023.*

*B. The Responsibilities of Businesses*

*1. Businesses should specifically and clearly inform consumers about
how they collect and use personal information and how they can exercise
their rights and choice.*

*2. Businesses should only collect consumers\' personal information for
specific, explicit, and legitimate disclosed purposes, and should not
further collect, use, or disclose consumers\' personal information for
reasons incompatible with those purposes.*

*3. Businesses should collect consumers\' personal information only to
the extent that it is relevant and limited to what is necessary in
relation to the purposes for which it is being collected, used, and
shared.*

*4. Businesses should provide consumers or their authorized agents with
easily accessible means to allow consumers and their children to obtain
their personal information, to delete it, or correct it, and to opt-out
of its sale and the sharing across business platforms, services,
businesses and devices, and to limit the use of their sensitive personal
information.*

*5. Businesses should not penalize consumers for exercising these
rights.*

*6. Businesses should take reasonable precautions to protect consumers\'
personal information from a security breach.*

*7. Businesses should be held accountable when they violate consumers\'
privacy rights, and the penalties should be higher when the violation
affects children.*

*C. Implementation of the Law*

*1. The rights of consumers and the responsibilities of businesses
should be Implemented with the goal of strengthening consumer privacy,
while giving attention to the impact on business and innovation.
Consumer privacy and the development of beneficial new products and
services are not necessarily incompatible goals. Strong consumer privacy
rights create incentives to innovate and develop new products that are
privacy protective.*

*2. Businesses and consumers should be provided with clear guidance
about their responsibilities and rights.*

*3. The law should place the consumer in a position to knowingly and
freely negotiate with a business over the business\' use of the
consumer\'s personal information.*

*4. The law should adjust to technological changes, help consumers
exercise their rights, and assist businesses with compliance, with the
continuing goal of strengthening consumer privacy.*

*5. The law should enable pro-consumer new products and services and
promote efficiency of Implementation for business, provided that the
amendments do not compromise or weaken consumer privacy.*

*6. The law should be amended, if necessary, to improve its operation,
provided that the amendments do not compromise or weaken consumer
privacy, while giving attention to the Impact on business and
innovation.*

*7. Businesses should be held accountable for violating the law through
vigorous administrative and civil enforcement.*

*8. To the extent it advances consumer privacy and business compliance,
the law should be compatible with privacy laws in other jurisdictions.*

*SEC. 3. Section 1798.100 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.100. General Duties of Businesses that Collect Personal
Information*

1798.100

\(a) ~~A consumer shall have the right to request that a business that
collects a consumer's personal information disclose to that consumer the
categories and specific pieces of personal information the business has
collected.~~

~~(b)~~ A business that *controls the collection of* ~~collects~~ a
consumer's personal information shall, at or before the point of
collection, inform consumers as to*:*

*(1)* the categories of personal information to be collected and the
purposes for which the categories of personal information *are collected
or used* ~~shall be used~~ *and whether such information is sold or
shared*. A business shall not collect additional categories of personal
information or use personal information collected for additional
purposes *that are incompatible with the disclosed purpose for which the
personal information was collected,* without providing the consumer with
notice consistent with this section.

*(2) if the business collects sensitive personal information, the
categories of sensitive personal information to be collected and the
purposes for which the categories of sensitive personal information are
collected or used and whether such information is sold or shared. A
business shall not collect additional categories of sensitive personal
information or use sensitive personal information collected for
additional purposes that are incompatible with the disclosed purpose for
which the sensitive personal information was collected, without
providing the consumer with notice consistent with this section.*

*(3) the length of time the business intends to retain each category of
personal information, including sensitive personal information, or if
that is not possible, the criteria used to determine such period,
provided that a business shall not retain a consumer\'s personal
information or sensitive personal information for each disclosed purpose
for which the personal information was collected for longer than is
reasonably necessary for that disclosed purpose.*

*(b) A business that, acting as a third party, controls the collection
of personal information about a consumer may satisfy its obligation
under subdivision (a) by providing the required information prominently
and conspicuously on the homepage of its internet website. In addition,
if such business, acting as a third party, controls the collection of
personal information about a consumer on its premises, including in a
vehicle, then the business shall, at or before the point of collection,
inform consumers as to the categories of personal information to be
collected and the purposes for which the categories of personal
information are used, and whether such personal information is sold, in
a clear and conspicuous manner at such location.*

*(c) A business\'s collection, use, retention, and sharing of a
consumer\'s personal information shall be reasonably necessary and
proportionate to achieve the purposes for which the personal information
was collected or processed, or for another disclosed purpose that is
compatible with the context in which the personal information was
collected, and not further processed in a manner that is incompatible
with those purposes.*

*(d) A business that collects a consumer\'s personal information and
that sells that personal information to, or shares it with, a third
party or that discloses it to a service provider or contractor for a
business purpose shall enter into an agreement with such third party,
service provider, or contractor, that:*

*(1) specifies that the personal information is sold or disclosed by the
business only for limited and specified purposes;*

*(2) obligates the third party, service provider, or contractor to
comply with applicable obligations under this title and obligate those
persons to provide the same level of privacy protection as is required
by this title;*

*(3) grants the business rights to take reasonable and appropriate steps
to help to ensure thot the third party, service provider, or contractor
uses the personal information transferred in a manner consistent with
the business\'s obligations under this title;*

*(4) requires the third party, service provider, or contractor to notify
the business if it makes a determination that it can no longer meet its
obligations under this title;*

*(5) grants the business the right, upon notice, including under
paragraph (4), to take reasonable and appropriate steps to stop and
remediate unauthorized use of personal information.*

*(e) A business that collects a consumer\'s personal information shall
Implement reasonable security procedures and practices appropriate to
the nature of the personal information to protect the personal
information from unauthorized or illegal access, destruction, use,
modification, or disclosure in accordance with Section 1798.81.5.*

*(f) Nothing in this section shall require a business to disclose trade
secrets, as specified in regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph (3)
of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185.*

~~(c) A business shall provide the information specified in subdivision
(a) to a consumer only upon receipt of a verifiable consumer request.~~

~~(d) A business that receives a verifiable consumer request from a
consumer to access personal information shall promptly take steps to
disclose and deliver, free of charge to the consumer, the personal
information required by this section. The information may be delivered
by mail or electronically, and if provided electronically, the
information shall be in a portable and, to the extent technically
feasible, readily useable format that allows the consumer to transmit
this information to another entity without hindrance. A business may
provide personal information to a consumer at any time, but shall not be
required to provide personal information to a consumer more than twice
in a 12-month period.~~

~~(e) This section shall not require a business to retain any personal
information collected for a single, one-time transaction, if such
information is not sold or retained by the business or to reidentify or
otherwise link information that is not maintained in a manner that would
be considered personal information.~~

*SEC. 5. Section 1798.105 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.105. Consumers\' Right to Delete Personal Information*

1798.105

\(a) A consumer shall have the right to request that a business delete
any personal information about the consumer which the business has
collected from the consumer.

\(b) A business that collects personal information about consumers shall
disclose, pursuant to Section 1798.130, the consumer's rights to request
the deletion of the consumer's personal information.

\(c)

*(1)* A business that receives a verifiable consumer request from a
consumer to delete the consumer's personal information pursuant to
subdivision (a) of this section shall delete the consumer's personal
information from its records*,* ~~and direct~~ *notify* any service
providers *or contractors* to delete the consumer's personal information
from their records*, and notify all third parties to whom the business
has sold or shared such personal information, to delete the consumer's
personal information, unless this proves impossible or involves
disproportionate effort*.

*(2) The business may maintain a confidential record of deletion
requests solely for the purpose of preventing the personal information
of a consumer who has submitted a deletion request from being sold, for
compliance with laws, or for other purposes solely to the extent
permissible under this title.*

*(3) A service provider or contractor shall cooperate with the business
in responding to a verifiable consumer request, and at the direction of
the business, shall delete, or enable the business to delete, and shall
notify any of its own service providers or contractors to delete,
personal information about the consumer collected, used, processed, or
retained by the service provider or the contractor. The service provider
or contractor shall notify any service providers, contractors or third
parties who may have accessed such personal information from or through
the service provider or contractor, unless the information was accessed
at the direction of the business, to delete the consumer\'s personal
information, unless this proves impossible or involves disproportionate
effort. A service provider or contractor shall not be required to comply
with a deletion request submitted by the consumer directly to the
service provider or contractor to the extent that the service provider
or contractor has collected, used, processed, or retained the
consumer\'s personal information in its role as a service provider or
contractor to the business.*

\(d) A business or a service provider *or contractor, acting pursuant to
its contract with the business, another service provider, or another
contractor,* shall not be required to comply with a consumer's request
to delete the consumer's personal information if it is *reasonably*
necessary for the business*,* ~~or~~ service provider*, or contractor*
to maintain the consumer's personal information in order to:

\(1) Complete the transaction for which the personal information was
collected, fulfill the terms of a written warranty or product recall
conducted in accordance with federal law, provide a good or service
requested by the consumer, or reasonably anticipated within the context
of a business' ongoing business relationship with the consumer, or
otherwise perform a contract between the business and the consumer.

\(2) ~~Detect security incidents, protect against malicious, deceptive,
fraudulent, or illegal activity; or prosecute those responsible for that
activity.~~ *Help to ensure security and integrity to the extent the use
of the consumer\'s personal information is reasonably necessary and
proportionate for those purposes.*

\(3) Debug to identify and repair errors that impair existing intended
functionality.

\(4) Exercise free speech, ensure the right of another consumer to
exercise that consumer's right of free speech, or exercise another right
provided for by law.

\(5) Comply with the California Electronic Communications Privacy Act
pursuant to Chapter 3.6 (commencing with Section 1546) of Title 12 of
Part 2 of the Penal Code.

\(6) Engage in public or peer-reviewed scientific, historical, or
statistical research ~~in the public interest~~ that *conforms or*
adheres to all other applicable ethics and privacy laws, when the
business'*s* deletion of the information is likely to render impossible
or seriously impair the ~~achievement of~~ *ability to complete* such
research, if the consumer has provided informed consent.

\(7) To enable solely internal uses that are reasonably aligned with the
expectations of the consumer based on the consumer's relationship with
the business *and compatible with the context in which the consumer
provided the information*.

\(8) Comply with a legal obligation.

~~(9) Otherwise use the consumer's personal information, internally, in
a lawful manner that is compatible with the context in which the
consumer provided the information.~~

*SEC. 6. Section 1798.106 is added to the Civil Code to read:*

*1798.106. Consumers\' Right to Correct Inaccurate Personal Information*

*1798.106*

*(a) A consumer shall have the right to request a business that
maintains inaccurate personal information about the consumer correct
such inaccurate personal information, taking into account the nature of
the personal information and the purposes of the processing of the
personal information.*

*(b) A business that collects personal information about consumers shall
disclose, pursuant to Section 1798.130, the consumer\'s right to request
correction of inaccurate personal information.*

*(c) A business that receives a verifiable consumer request to correct
inaccurate personal information shall use commercially reasonable
efforts to correct the inaccurate personal information, as directed by
the consumer, pursuant to Section 1798.130 and regulations adopted
pursuant to paragraph (8) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185.*

*SEC. 7. Section 1798.110 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.110. Consumers\' Right to Know What Personal Information is Being
Collected. Right to Access Personal Information*

1798.110

\(a) A consumer shall have the right to request that a business that
collects personal information about the consumer disclose to the
consumer the following:

\(1) The categories of personal information it has collected about that
consumer.

\(2) The categories of sources from which the personal information is
collected.

\(3) The business or commercial purpose for collecting or selling
personal information.

\(4) The categories of third parties with whom the business shares
personal information.

\(5) The specific pieces of personal information it has collected about
that consumer.

\(b) A business that collects personal information about a consumer shall
disclose to the consumer, pursuant to *subparagraph (B) of* paragraph
(3) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.130, the information specified in
subdivision (a) upon receipt of a verifiable consumer request from the
consumer*, provided that a business shal be deemed to be in compliance
with paragraphs (1) through (4) of subdivision (a) of this Section to
the extent that the categories of information and the business or
commercial purpose for collecting or selling or sharing personal
information it would be required to disclose to the consumer pursuant to
paragraphs (1) through (4) of subdivision (a) is the same as the
information it has disclosed pursuant to paragraphs (1) through (4) of
subdivision (c) of this Section*.

\(c) A business that collects personal information about consumers shall
disclose, pursuant to subparagraph (B) of paragraph (5) of subdivision
(a) of Section 1798.130:

\(1) The categories of personal information it has collected about
consumers.

\(2) The categories of sources from which the personal information is
collected.

\(3) The business or commercial purpose for collecting*,* ~~or~~
selling*, or sharing* personal information.

\(4) The categories of third parties ~~with~~ *to* whom the business
~~shares~~ *discloses* personal information.

\(5) That a consumer has the right to request the specific pieces of
personal information the business has collected about that consumer.

~~(d) This section does not require a business to do the following:~~

~~(1) Retain any personal information about a consumer collected for a
single one-time transaction if, in the ordinary course of business, that
information about the consumer is not retained.~~

~~(2) Reidentify or otherwise link any data that, in the ordinary course
of business, is not maintained in a manner that would be considered
personal information.~~

*SEC. 8. Section 1798.115 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.115. Consumers\' Right to Know What Personal Information is Sold or
Shared and to Whom*

1798.115

\(a) A consumer shall have the right to request that a business that
sells the consumer's personal information, or that discloses it for a
business purpose, disclose to that consumer:

\(1) The categories of personal information that the business collected
about the consumer.

\(2) The categories of personal information that the business sold *or
shared* about the consumer and the categories of third parties to whom
the personal information was sold *or shared*, by category or categories
of personal information for each category of third parties to whom the
personal information was sold *or shared*.

\(3) The categories of personal information that the business disclosed
about the consumer for a business purpose *and the categories of persons
to whom it was disclosed for a business purpose*.

\(b) A business that sells *or shares* personal information about a
consumer, or that discloses a consumer's personal information for a
business purpose, shall disclose, pursuant to paragraph (4) of
subdivision (a) of Section 1798.130, the information specified in
subdivision (a) to the consumer upon receipt of a verifiable consumer
request from the consumer.

\(c) A business that sells *or shares* consumers' personal information,
or that discloses consumers' personal information for a business
purpose, shall disclose, pursuant to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (5)
of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.130:

\(1) The category or categories of consumers' personal information it has
sold *or shared*, or if the business has not sold *or shared* consumers'
personal information, it shall disclose that fact.

\(2) The category or categories of consumers' personal information it has
disclosed for a business purpose, or if the business has not disclosed
~~the~~ consumers' personal information for a business purpose, it shall
disclose that fact.

\(d) A third party shall not sell *or share* personal information about a
consumer that has been sold to*, or shared with,* the third party by a
business unless the consumer has received explicit notice and is
provided an opportunity to exercise the right to opt-out pursuant to
Section 1798.120.

*SEC. 9. Section 1798.120 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.120. Consumers\' Right to Opt-Out of Sale or Sharing of Personal
Information*

1798.120

\(a) A consumer shall have the right, at any time, to direct a business
that sells *or shares* personal information about the consumer to third
parties not to sell *or share* the consumer's personal information. This
right may be referred to as the right to opt-out *of sale or sharing*.

\(b) A business that sells consumers' personal information to*, or shares
it with,* third parties shall provide notice to consumers, pursuant to
subdivision (a) of Section 1798.135, that this information may be sold
*or shared* and that consumers have the "right to opt-out" of the sale
*or sharing* of their personal information.

\(c) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), a business shall not sell *or
share* the personal information of consumers if the business has actual
knowledge that the consumer is less than 16 years of age, unless the
consumer, in the case of consumers at least 13 years of age and less
than 16 years of age, or the consumer's parent or guardian, in the case
of consumers who are less than 13 years of age, has affirmatively
authorized the sale *or sharing* of the consumer's personal information.
A business that willfully disregards the consumer's age shall be deemed
to have had actual knowledge of the consumer's age. ~~This right may be
referred to as the "right to opt-in."~~

\(d) A business that has received direction from a consumer not to sell
*or share* the consumer's personal information or, in the case of a
minor consumer's personal information has not received consent to sell
*or share* the minor consumer's personal information shall be
prohibited, pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (~~a~~*c*) of
Section 1798.135, from selling *or sharing* the consumer's personal
information after its receipt of the consumer's direction, unless the
consumer subsequently provides ~~express authorization~~ *consent,* for
the sale *or sharing* of the consumer's personal information.

*SEC. 10. Section 1798.121 is added to the Civil Code to read:*

*1798.121. Consumers\' Right to Limit Use and Disclosure of Sensitive
Personal Information*

*1798.121.*

*(a) A consumer shall have the right, at any time, to direct a business
that collects sensitive personal information about the consumer to limit
its use of the consumer\'s sensitive personal information to that use
which is necessary to perform the services or provide the goods
reasonably expected by an average consumer who requests such goods or
services, to perform the services set forth in paragraphs (2), (4), (5),
and (8) of subdivision (e) of Section 1798.140, and as authorized by
regulations adopted pursuant to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (19) of
subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185. A business that uses or discloses a
consumer\'s sensitive personal information for purposes other than those
specified in this subdivision shall provide notice to consumers,
pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 1798.135, that this information
may be used, or disclosed to a service provider or contractor, for
additional, specified purposes and that consumers have the right to
limit the use or disclosure of their sensitive personal information.*

*(b) A business that has received direction from a consumer not to use
or disclose the consumer\'s sensitive personal information, except as
authorized by subdivision (a), shall be prohibited, pursuant to
paragraph (4) of subdivision (c) of Section 1798.1.35, from using or
disclosing the consumer\'s sensitive personal information for any other
purpose after its receipt of the consumer\'s direction, unless the
consumer subsequently provides consent for the use or disclosure of the
consumer\'s sensitive personal information for additional purposes.*

*(c) A service provider or contractor that assists a business in
performing the purposes authorized by subdivision (a) may not use the
sensitive personal information, after it has received instructions from
the business and to the extent it has actual knowledge that the personal
information is sensitive personal information for any other purpose. A
service provider or contractor is only required to limit its use of
sensitive personal information received pursuant to a written contract
with the business in response to instructions from the business and only
with respect to its relationship with that business.*

*(d) Sensitive Personal Information that is collected or processed
without the purpose of inferring characteristics about a consumer, is
not subject to this Section, as further defined in regulations adopted
pursuant to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (19) of subdivision (a) of
Section 1798.185, and shall be treated as personal information for
purposes of all other sections of this Act, including Section 1798.100.*

*SEC. 11. Section 1798.125 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.125. Consumers\' Right of No Retaliation Following Opt-Out or
Exercise of Other Rights*

1798.125

\(a)

\(1) A business shall not discriminate against a consumer because the
consumer exercised any of the consumer's rights under this title,
including, but not limited to, by:

\(A) Denying goods or services to the consumer.

\(B) Charging different prices or rates for goods or services, including
through the use of discounts or other benefits or imposing penalties.

\(C) Providing a different level or quality of goods or services to the
consumer.

\(D) Suggesting that the consumer will receive a different price or rate
for goods or services or a different level or quality of goods or
services.

*(E) Retaliating against an employee, applicant for employment, or
independent contractor, as defined in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2)
of subdivision (m) of Section 1798.145, for exercising their rights
under this title.*

\(2) Nothing in this subdivision prohibits a business*, pursuant to
subdivision (b),* from charging a consumer a different price or rate, or
from providing a different level or quality of goods or services to the
consumer, if that difference is reasonably related to the value provided
to the business by the consumer's data.

*(3) This subdivision does not prohibit a business from offering
loyalty, rewards, premium features, discounts, or club card programs
consistent with this title.*

\(b)

\(1) A business may offer financial incentives, including payments to
consumers as compensation, for the collection of personal information,
the sale *or sharing* of personal information, or the ~~deletion~~
*retention* of personal information. A business may also offer a
different price, rate, level, or quality of goods or services to the
consumer if that price or difference is ~~directly~~ *reasonably*
related to the value provided to the business by the consumer's data.

\(2) A business that offers any financial incentives pursuant to this
subdivision shall notify consumers of the financial incentives pursuant
to Section 1798.130.

\(3) A business may enter a consumer into a financial incentive program
only if the consumer gives the business prior opt-in consent pursuant to
Section 1798.130 that clearly describes the material terms of the
financial incentive program, and which may be revoked by the consumer at
any time. *If a consumer refuses to provide opt-in consent, then the
business shall wait for at least 12 months before next requesting that
the consumer provide opt-in consent, or as prescribed by regulations
adopted pursuant to Section 1798.185.*

\(4) A business shall not use financial incentive practices that are
unjust, unreasonable, coercive, or usurious in nature.

*SEC. 12. Section 1798.130 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.130. Notice, Disclosure, Correction, and Deletion Requirements*

1798.130

\(a) In order to comply with Sections 1798.100, 1798.105, 1798.110,
1798.115, and 1798.125, a business shall, in a form that is reasonably
accessible to consumers:

\(1)

\(A) Make available to consumers two or more designated methods for
submitting requests for information required to be disclosed pursuant to
Sections 1798.110 and 1798.115, *or requests for deletion or correction
pursuant to Sections 1798.105 and 1798.106, respectively,* including, at
a minimum, a toll-free telephone number. A business that operates
exclusively online and has a direct relationship with a consumer from
whom it collects personal information shall only be required to provide
an email address for submitting requests for information required to be
disclosed pursuant to Sections 1798.110 and 1798.115*, or for requests
for deletion or correction pursuant to Sections 1798.105 and 1798.106,
respectively*.

\(B) If the business maintains an internet website, make the internet
website available to consumers to submit requests for information
required to be disclosed pursuant to Sections 1798.110 and 1798.115*, or
requests for deletion or correction pursuant to Sections 1798.105 and
1798.106, respectively*.

\(2)

*(A)* Disclose and deliver the required information to a consumer free
of charge*, or correct inaccurate personal information, or delete a
consumer's personal information, based on the consumer's request,*
within 45 days of receiving a verifiable consumer request from the
consumer. The business shall promptly take steps to determine whether
the request is a verifiable consumer request, but this shall not extend
the business' duty to disclose and deliver the information, *or correct
inaccurate personal information or delete personal information,* within
45 days of receipt of the consumer's request. The time period to provide
the required information, *or correct inaccurate personal information or
delete personal information,* may be extended once by an additional 45
days when reasonably necessary, provided the consumer is provided notice
of the extension within the first 45-day period. The disclosure *of the
required information* ~~shall cover the 12-month period preceding the
business' receipt of the verifiable consumer request and~~ shall be made
in writing and delivered through the consumer's account with the
business, if the consumer maintains an account with the business, or by
mail or electronically at the consumer's option if the consumer does not
maintain an account with the business, in a readily useable format that
allows the consumer to transmit this information from one entity to
another entity without hindrance. The business may require
authentication of the consumer that is reasonable in light of the nature
of the personal information requested, but shall not require the
consumer to create an account with the business in order to make a
verifiable consumer request. If the consumer maintains an account with
the business, the business may require the consumer to submit the
request through that account.

*(B) The disclosure of the required information shall cover the 12-month
period preceding the business\'s receipt of the verifiable consumer
request, provided that, upon the adoption of a regulation pursuant to
paragraph {9} of subdivision (a} of Section 1798.185, a consumer may
request that the business disclose the required information beyond the
12-month period and the business shall be required to provide such
information unless doing so proves Impossible or would involve a
disproportionate effort. A consumer\'s right to request required
information beyond the 12-month period, and a business\'s obligation to
provide such information, shall only apply to personal information
collected on or after January 1, 2022. Nothing in this subparagraph
shall require a business to keep personal information for any length of
time.*

\(3)

*(A) A business that receives a verifiable consumer request pursuant to
sections 1798.110 or 1798.115 shall disclose any personal information it
has collected about a consumer, directly or indirectly, including
through or by a service provider or contractor, to the consumer. A
service provider or contractor shall not be required to comply with a
verifiable consumer request received directly from a consumer or a
consumer\'s authorized agent pursuant to sections 1798.110 or 1798.115
to the extent that the service provider or contractor has collected
personal information about the consumer in its role as a service
provider or contractor. A service provider or contractor shall provide
assistance to a business with which it has a contractual relationship
with respect to the business\'s response to a verifiable consumer
request, including but not limited to by providing to the business the
consumer\'s personal information in the service provider or
contractor\'s possession, which the service provider or contractor
obtained as a result of providing services to the business, and by
correcting inaccurate information, or by enabling the business to do the
same. A service provider or contractor that collects personal
information pursuant to a written contract with a business shall be
required to assist the business through appropriate technical and
organizational measures in complying with the requirements of
subdivisions (d} through (f) of Section 1798.100, taking into account
the nature of the processing.*

*(B)* For purposes of subdivision (b) of Section 1798.110:

\(~~A~~*i*) To identify the consumer, associate the information provided
by the consumer in the verifiable consumer request to any personal
information previously collected by the business about the consumer.

\(~~B~~*ii*) Identify by category or categories the personal information
collected about the consumer ~~in the preceding 12 months~~ *for the
applicable period of time* by reference to the enumerated category or
categories in subdivision (c) that most closely describes the personal
information collected; *the categories of sources from which the
consumer's personal information was collected; the business or
commercial purpose for collecting, or selling or sharing the consumer's
personal information; and the categories of third parties to whom the
business discloses the consumer's personal information.*

*(iii) Provide the specific pieces of personal information obtained from
the consumer in a format that is easily understandable to the average
consumer, and to the extent technically feasible, in a structured,
commonly used, machine-readable format, which also may be transmitted to
another entity at the consumer's request without hindrance. "Specific
pieces of information" do not include data generated to help ensure
security and integrity or as prescribed by regulation. Personal
information is not considered to have been disclosed by a business when
a consumer instructs a business to transfer the consumer's personal
information from one business to another in the context of switching
services.*

\(4) For purposes of subdivision (b) of Section 1798.115:

\(A) Identify the consumer and associate the information provided by the
consumer in the verifiable consumer request to any personal information
previously collected by the business about the consumer.

\(B) Identify by category or categories the personal information of the
consumer that the business sold *or shared* ~~in the preceding 12
months~~ *during the applicable period of time* by reference to the
enumerated category in subdivision (c) that most closely describes the
personal information, and provide the categories of third parties to
whom the consumer's personal information was sold *or shared* ~~in the
preceding 12 months~~ *during the applicable period of time* by
reference to the enumerated category or categories in subdivision (c)
that most closely describes the personal information sold. The business
shall disclose the information in a list that is separate from a list
generated for the purposes of subparagraph (C).

\(C) Identify by category or categories the personal information of the
consumer that the business disclosed for a business purpose ~~in the
preceding 12 months~~ *during the applicable period of time* by
reference to the enumerated category or categories in subdivision (c)
that most closely describes the personal information, and provide the
categories of ~~third parties~~ *persons* to whom the consumer's
personal information was disclosed for a business purpose ~~in the
preceding 12 months~~ *during the applicable period of time* by
reference to the enumerated category or categories in subdivision (c)
that most closely describes the personal information disclosed. The
business shall disclose the information in a list that is separate from
a list generated for the purposes of subparagraph (B).

\(5) Disclose the following information in its online privacy policy or
policies if the business has an online privacy policy or policies and in
any California-specific description of consumers' privacy rights, or if
the business does not maintain those policies, on its internet website
and update that information at least once every 12 months:

\(A) A description of a consumer's rights pursuant to Sections 1798.100,
1798.105, *1798.106,* 1798.110, 1798.115, and 1798.125 and ~~one~~ *two*
or more designated methods for submitting requests*, except as provided
in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a)*.

\(B) For purposes of subdivision (c) of Section 1798.110~~,~~*;*

*(i)* a list of the categories of personal information it has collected
about consumers in the preceding 12 months by reference to the
enumerated category or categories in subdivision (c) that most closely
describe the personal information collected;

*(ii) the categories of sources from which consumers' personal
information is collected;*

*(iii) the business or commercial purpose for collecting or selling or
sharing consumers' personal information; and*

*(iv) the categories of third parties to whom the business discloses
consumers' personal information.*

\(C) For purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (c) of Section
1798.115, two separate lists:

\(i) A list of the categories of personal information it has sold *or
shared* about consumers in the preceding 12 months by reference to the
enumerated category or categories in subdivision (c) that most closely
describe the personal information sold *or shared*, or if the business
has not sold *or shared* consumers' personal information in the
preceding 12 months, the business shall *prominently* disclose that fact
*in its privacy policy*.

\(ii) A list of the categories of personal information it has disclosed
about consumers for a business purpose in the preceding 12 months by
reference to the enumerated category in subdivision (c) that most
closely describe*s* the personal information disclosed, or if the
business has not disclosed consumers' personal information for a
business purpose in the preceding 12 months, the business shall disclose
that fact.

\(6) Ensure that all individuals responsible for handling consumer
inquiries about the business' privacy practices or the business'
compliance with this title are informed of all requirements in Sections
1798.100, 1798.105, *1798.106,* 1798.110, 1798.115, and 1798.125, and
this section, and how to direct consumers to exercise their rights under
those sections.

\(7) Use any personal information collected from the consumer in
connection with the business' verification of the consumer's request
solely for the purposes of verification*, and shall not further disclose
the personal information, retain it longer than necessary for purposes
of verification, or use it for unrelated purposes*.

\(b) A business is not obligated to provide the information required by
Sections 1798.110 and 1798.115 to the same consumer more than twice in a
12-month period.

\(c) The categories of personal information required to be disclosed
pursuant to Sections *1798.100,* 1798.110 and 1798.115 shall follow the
definition*s* of personal information *and sensitive personal
information* in Section 1798.140 *by describing the categories of
personal information using the specific terms set forth in subparagraphs
(A) through (K) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (v) of Section 1798.140*
*and by describing the categories of sensitive personal information
using the specific terms set forth in paragraphs (1) through (9) of
subdivision (ae) of Section 1798.140*.

*SEC. 13. Section 1798.135 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.135. Methods of Limiting Sale, Sharing, and Use of Personal
Information and Use of Sensitive Personal Information*

1798.135

\(a) A business that ~~is required to comply with Section 1798.120~~
*sells or shares consumers\' personal information or uses or discloses
consumers\' sensitive personal information for purposes other than those
authorized by subdivision (a) of Section 1798.121* shall, in a form that
is reasonably accessible to consumers:

\(1) Provide a clear and conspicuous link on the business's Internet
homepage*(s)*, titled "Do Not Sell My Personal Information," to an
Internet Web page that enables a consumer, or a person authorized by the
consumer, to opt-out of the sale of the consumer's personal
information*.*

*(2) Provide a clear and conspicuous link on the business\'s internet
homepage(s), titled \"Limit the Use of My Sensitive Personal
Information\" that enables a consumer, or a person authorized by the
consumer, to limit the use or disclosure of the consumer\'s sensitive
personal information to those uses authorized by subdivision (a) of
Section l798.121.*

*(3) At the business\'s discretion, utilize a single, clearly-labeled
link on the business\'s internet homepage(s), in lieu of complying with
paragraphs (1) and (2), if such link easily allows a consumer to opt-out
of the sale or sharing of the consumer\'s personal information and to
limit the use or disclosure of the consumer\'s sensitive personal
information.*

*(4) In the event that a business responds to opt-out requests received
pursuant to paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) by informing the consumer of a
charge for the use of any product or service, present the terms of any
financial incentive offered pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section
1798.125 for the retention, use, sale, or sharing of the consumer\'s
personal information.*

*(b)*

*(1) A business shall not be required to comply with subdivision (a) if
the business allows consumers to opt-out of the sale or sharing of their
personal information and to limit the use of their sensitive personal
information through an opt-out preference signal sent with the
consumer\'s consent by a platform, technology, or mechanism, based on
technical specifications set forth in regulations adopted pursuant to
paragraph (20) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185, to the business
indicating the consumer\'s intent to opt-out of the business\'s sale or
sharing of the consumer\'s personal information or to limit the use or
disclosure of the consumer\'s sensitive personal information, or both.*

*(2) A business that allows consumers to opt-out of the sale or sharing
of their personal information and to limit the use of their sensitive
personal information pursuant to paragraph (1) may provide a link to a
webpage that enables the consumer to consent to the business Ignoring
the apt-out preference signal with respect to that business\'s sale or
sharing of the consumer\'s personal information or the use of the
consumer\'s sensitive personal information for additional purposes
provided that:*

*(A) the consent webpage also allows the consumer or a person authorized
by the consumer to revoke such consent as easily as it is affirmatively
provided;*

*(B) the link to the webpage does not degrade the consumer\'s experience
on the webpage the consumer intends to visit and has a similar look,
feel, and size relative to other links on the same webpage; and*

*(C) the consent webpage complies with technical specifications set
forth in regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph (20) of subdivision
(a) of Section 1798.185.*

*(3) A business that complies with subdivision (a) of this Section is
not required to comply with subdivision (b), For the purposes of
clarity, a business may elect whether to comply with subdivision (a) or
subdivision (b).*

*(c)* A business *that is subject to this Section* shall*:*

*(1) ~~n~~Not* require a consumer to create an account *or provide
additional information beyond what is necessary* in order to direct the
business not to sell *or share* the consumer's personal information *or
to limit the use or disclosure of the consumer's sensitive personal
information*.

\(2) Include a description of a consumer's rights pursuant to Section*s*
1798.120 *and 1798.121*, along with a separate link to the "Do Not Sell
*or Share* My Personal Information" ~~Internet Web page~~ *internet
webpage and a separate link to the "Limit the Use of My Sensitive
Personal Information" internet webpage, if applicable, or a single link
to both choices, or a statement that the business responds to and abides
by opt-out preference signals sent by a platform, technology, or
mechanism in accordance with subdivision (b),* in:

\(A) Its online privacy policy or policies if the business has an online
privacy policy or policies.

\(B) Any California-specific description of consumers' privacy rights.

\(3) Ensure that all individuals responsible for handling consumer
inquiries about the business's privacy practices or the business's
compliance with this title are informed of all requirements in
Section*s* 1798.120*, 1798.121,* and this section and how to direct
consumers to exercise their rights under those sections.

\(4) For consumers who exercise their right to opt-out of the sale *or
sharing* of their personal information *or limit the use or disclosure
of their sensitive personal information*, refrain from selling *or
sharing the consumer's* personal information ~~collected by the business
about the consumer~~ *and wait for at least 12 months before requesting
that the consumer authorize the sale or sharing of the consumer's
personal information or the use and disclosure of the consumer's
sensitive personal information for additional purposes, or as authorized
by regulations*.

\(5) For ~~a consumer who has opted-out of the sale of the consumer's
personal information, respect the consumer's decision to opt-out for at
least 12 months before requesting that the consumer authorize the sale
of the consumer's personal information~~ *consumers under 16 years of
age who do not consent to the sale or sharing of their personal
information, refrain from selling or sharing the personal information of
the consumer under 16 years of age, and wait for at least 12 months
before requesting the consumer\'s consent again, or as authorized by
regulations or until the consumer attains 16 years of age*.

\(6) Use any personal information collected from the consumer in
connection with the submission of the consumer's opt-out request solely
for the purposes of complying with the opt-out request.

\(~~b~~*d*) Nothing in this title shall be construed to require a
business to comply with the title by including the required links and
text on the homepage that the business makes available to the public
generally, if the business maintains a separate and additional homepage
that is dedicated to California consumers and that includes the required
links and text, and the business takes reasonable steps to ensure that
California consumers are directed to the homepage for California
consumers and not the homepage made available to the public generally.

\(~~c~~*e*) A consumer may authorize another person ~~solely~~ to opt-out
of the sale *or sharing* of the consumer's personal information*, and to
limit the use of the consumer's sensitive personal information,* on the
consumer's behalf, *including through an opt-out preference signal, as
defined in paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of this Section, indicating
the consumer's intent to opt-out,* and a business shall comply with an
opt-out request received from a person authorized by the consumer to act
on the consumer's behalf, pursuant to regulations adopted by the
Attorney General*, regardless of whether the business has elected to
comply with subdivision (a) or (b) of this Section. For purposes of
clarity, a business that elects to comply with subdivision (a) of this
Section may respond to the consumer's opt-out consistent with Section
1798.125*.

*(f) If a business communicates a consumer\'s opt-out request to any
person authorized by the business to collect personal information, the
person shall thereafter only use such consumer\'s personal information
for a business purpose specified by the business, or as otherwise
permitted by this title, and shall be prohibited from:*

*(1) selling or sharing the personal information; or*

*(2) retaining, using, or disclosing such consumer\'s personal
information:*

*(A) for any purpose other than for the specific purpose of performing
the services offered to the business,*

*(B) outside of the direct business relationship between the person and
the business, or*

*(C) for a commercial purpose other than providing the services to the
business.*

*(g) A business that communicates a consumer\'s opt-out request to a
person pursuant to subdivision (f) shall not be liable under this title
if the person receiving the opt-out request violates the restrictions
set forth in the title, provided that, at the time of communicating the
opt-out request, the business does not have actual knowledge, or reason
to believe, that the person intends to commit such a violation. Any
provision of a contract or agreement of any kind that purports to waive
or limit in any way this subdivision shall be void and unenforceable.*

*SEC. 14. Section 1798.140 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.140 Definitions*

1798.140

For purposes of this title:

*(a) "Advertising and marketing" means a communication by a business or
a person acting on the business's behalf in any medium intended to
induce a consumer to obtain goods, services, or employment.*

\(~~a~~*b*) "Aggregate consumer information" means information that
relates to a group or category of consumers, from which individual
consumer identities have been removed, that is not linked or reasonably
linkable to any consumer or household, including via a device.
"Aggregate consumer information" does not mean one or more individual
consumer records that have been deidentified.

\(~~b~~*c*) "Biometric information" means an individual's physiological,
biological, or behavioral characteristics, including *information
pertaining to* an individual's deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), that ~~can
be~~ *is* used *or intended to be used*, singly or in combination with
each other or with other identifying data, to establish individual
identity. Biometric information includes, but is not limited to, imagery
of the iris, retina, fingerprint, face, hand, palm, vein patterns, and
voice recordings, from which an identifier template, such as a
faceprint, a minutiae template, or a voiceprint, can be extracted, and
keystroke patterns or rhythms, gait patterns or rhythms, and sleep,
health, or exercise data that contain identifying information.

\(~~c~~*d*) "Business" means:

\(1) A sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, association, or other legal entity that is organized or
operated for the profit or financial benefit of its shareholders or
other owners that collects consumers' personal information or on the
behalf of which that information is collected and that alone, or jointly
with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of
consumers' personal information, that does business in the State of
California, and that satisfies one or more of the following thresholds:

\(A) *As of January 1 of the calendar year,* ~~Has~~ *had* annual gross
revenues in excess of twenty-five million dollars (\$25,000,000) *in the
preceding calendar year*, as adjusted pursuant to paragraph (5) of
subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185.

\(B) Alone or in combination, annually buys *or*~~, receives for the
business's commercial purposes,~~ sells, or shares ~~for commercial
purposes, alone or in combination,~~ the personal information of
~~50,000~~ *100,000* or more consumers~~,~~ *or* households~~, or
devices~~.

\(C) Derives 50 percent or more of its annual revenues from selling *or
sharing* consumers' personal information.

\(2) Any entity that controls or is controlled by a business as defined
in paragraph (1) and that shares common branding with the business *and
with whom the business shares consumers' personal information*.
"Control" or "controlled" means ownership of, or the power to vote, more
than 50 percent of the outstanding shares of any class of voting
security of a business; control in any manner over the election of a
majority of the directors, or of individuals exercising similar
functions; or the power to exercise a controlling influence over the
management of a company. "Common branding" means a shared name,
servicemark, or trademark*, such that the average consumer would
understand that two or more entities are commonly owned*.

*(3) A joint venture or partnership composed of businesses in which each
business has at least a 40 percent interest. For purposes of this title,
the joint venture or partnership and each business that composes the
joint venture or partnership shall separately be considered a single
business, except that personal information in the possession of each
business and disclosed to the joint venture or partnership shall not be
shared with the other business.*

*(4) A person that does business in California, that is not covered by
paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) and that voluntarily certifies to the
California Privacy Protection Agency that it is in compliance with, and
agrees to be bound by, this title.*

\(~~d~~*e*) "Business purpose" means the use of personal information for
the business's ~~or a service provider's~~ operational purposes, or
other notified purposes, *or for the service provider or contractor's
operational purposes, as defined by regulations adopted pursuant to
paragraph (11) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185,* provided that
the use of personal information shall be reasonably necessary and
proportionate to achieve the ~~operational~~ purpose for which the
personal information was collected or processed or for another
~~operational~~ purpose that is compatible with the context in which the
personal information was collected. Business purposes are:

\(1) Auditing related ~~to a current interaction with the consumer and
concurrent transactions, including, but not limited to,~~ counting ad
impressions to unique visitors, verifying positioning and quality of ad
impressions, and auditing compliance with this specification and other
standards.

\(2) ~~Detecting security incidents, protecting against malicious,
deceptive, fraudulent, or illegal activity, and prosecuting those
responsible for that activity.~~ *Helping to ensure the security and
integrity to the extent the use of the consumer's personal information
is reasonably necessary and proportionate for these purposes.*

\(3) Debugging to identify and repair errors that impair existing
intended functionality.

\(4) Short-term, transient use, *including but not limited to
non-personalized advertising shown as a part of a consumer's current
interaction with the business,* provided that the *consumer's* personal
information is not disclosed to another third party and is not used to
build a profile about ~~a~~ *the* consumer or otherwise alter an
individual consumer's experience outside the current interaction *with
the business.*~~, including, but not limited to, the contextual
customization of ads shown as part of the same interaction.~~

\(5) Performing services on behalf of the business ~~or service
provider~~, including maintaining or servicing accounts, providing
customer service, processing or fulfilling orders and transactions,
verifying customer information, processing payments, providing
financing, ~~providing advertising or marketing services~~, providing
analytic services, *providing storage,* or providing similar services on
behalf of the business ~~or service provider~~.

*(6) Providing advertising and marketing services, except for
cross-context behavioral advertising, to the consumer, provided that for
the purpose of advertising and marketing, a service provider or
contractor shall not combine the personal information of opted-out
consumers which the service provider or contractor receives from or on
behalf of the business with personal information which the service
provider or contractor receives from or on behalf of another person or
persons, or collects from its own interaction with consumers.*

\(~~6~~*7*) Undertaking internal research for technological development
and demonstration.

\(~~7~~*8*) Undertaking activities to verify or maintain the quality or
safety of a service or device that is owned, manufactured, manufactured
for, or controlled by the business, and to improve, upgrade, or enhance
the service or device that is owned, manufactured, manufactured for, or
controlled by the business.

\(~~e~~*f*) "Collects," "collected," or "collection" means buying,
renting, gathering, obtaining, receiving, or accessing any personal
information pertaining to a consumer by any means. This includes
receiving information from the consumer, either actively or passively,
or by observing the consumer's behavior.

\(~~f~~*g*) "Commercial purposes" means to advance a person's commercial
or economic interests, such as by inducing another person to buy, rent,
lease, join, subscribe to, provide, or exchange products, goods,
property, information, or services, or enabling or effecting, directly
or indirectly, a commercial transaction. ~~"Commercial purposes" do not
include for the purpose of engaging in speech that state or federal
courts have recognized as noncommercial speech, including political
speech and journalism.~~

*(h) \"Consent\" means any freely given, specific, informed and
unambiguous indication of the consumer\'s wishes by which he or she, or
his or her legal guardian, by a person who has power of attorney or is
acting as a conservator for the consumer, such as by a statement or by a
clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of
personal information relating to him or her for a narrowly defined
particular purpose. Acceptance of a general or broad terms of use or
similar document that contains descriptions of personal information
processing along with other, unrelated information, does not constitute
consent. Hovering over, muting, pausing, or closing a given piece of
content does not constitute consent. Likewise, agreement obtained
through use of dark patterns does not constitute consen.t*

\(~~g~~*i*) "Consumer" means a natural person who is a California
resident, as defined in Section 17014 of Title 18 of the California Code
of Regulations, as that section read on September 1, 2017, however
identified, including by any unique identifier.

*(j)*

*(1) \"Contractor\" means a person to whom the business makes available
a consumer\'s personal information for a business purpose pursuant to a
written contract with the business, provided that the contract:*

*(A) Prohibits the contractor from:*

*(i) Selling or sharing the personal information.*

*(ii) Retaining, using, or disclosing the personal information for any
purpose other than for the business purposes specified in the contract,
including retaining, using, or disclosing the personal information for a
commercial purpose other than the business purposes specified in the
contract, or as otherwise permitted by this title.*

*(iii) Retaining, using, or disclosing the information outside of the
direct business relationship between the contractor and the business.*

*(iv) Combining the personal information which the contractor receives
pursuant to a written contract with the business with personal
information which it receives from or on behalf of another person or
persons, or collects from its own interaction with the consumer,
provided that the contractor may combine personal information to perform
any business purpose as defined in regulations adopted pursuant to
paragraph (10) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.l85, except as
provided for in paragraph (6) of subdivision (e) of this Section and in
regulations adopted by the California Privacy Protection Agency.*

*(B) Includes a certification made by contractor that the contractor
understands the restrictions in subparagraph (A) and will comply with
them,*

*(C) Permits, subject to agreement with the contractor, the business to
monitor the contractor\'s compliance with the contract through measures
including, but not limited to, ongoing manual reviews and automated
scans, and regular assessments, audits, or other technical and
operational testing at least once every twelve (12) months.*

*(2) If a contractor engages any other person to assist it in processing
personal information for a business purpose on behalf of the business,
or if any other person engaged by the contractor engages another person
to assist in processing personal information for such business purpose,
it shall notify the business of such engagement and the engagement shall
be pursuant to a written contract binding the other person to observe
all the requirements set forth in paragraph (1).*

*(k) \"Cross-context behavioral advertising\" means the targeting of
advertising to a consumer based on the consumer\'s personal information
obtained from the consumer\'s activity across businesses,
distinctly-branded websites, applications, or services, other than the
business, distinctly-branded website, application, or service with which
the consumer intentionally interacts.*

*(l) \"Dark pattern\" means a user interface designed or manipulated
with the substantial effect of subverting or impairing user autonomy,
decision-making, or choice, as further defined by regulation.*

\(~~h~~*m*) "Deidentified" means information that cannot reasonably *be
used to infer information about, or otherwise be linked to, a particular
consumer, provided that the business that possesses the information:*

*(A) takes reasonable measures to ensure that the information cannot be
associated with a consumer or household;*

*(B) publicly commits to maintain and use the information in
deidentified form and not to attempt to reidentify the information,
except that the business may attempt to reidentify the information
solely for the purpose of determining whether its deidentification
processes satisfy the requirements of this subdivision; and*

*(C) contractually obligates any recipients of the information to comply
with all provisions of this subdivision.*~~identify, relate to,
describe, be capable of being associated with, or be linked, directly or
indirectly, to a particular consumer, provided that a business that uses
deidentified information:~~

~~(1) Has implemented technical safeguards that prohibit
reidentification of the consumer to whom the information may pertain.~~

~~(2) Has implemented business processes that specifically prohibit
reidentification of the information.~~

~~(3) Has implemented business processes to prevent inadvertent release
of deidentified information.~~

~~(4) Makes no attempt to reidentify the information~~.

\(~~i~~*n*) "Designated methods for submitting requests" means a mailing
address, email address, internet web page, internet web portal,
toll-free telephone number, or other applicable contact information,
whereby consumers may submit a request or direction under this title,
and any new, consumer-friendly means of contacting a business, as
approved by the Attorney General pursuant to Section 1798.185.

\(~~j~~*o*) "Device" means any physical object that is capable of
connecting to the internet, directly or indirectly, or to another
device.

~~(k) "Health insurance information" means a consumer's insurance policy
number or subscriber identification number, any unique identifier used
by a health insurer to identify the consumer, or any information in the
consumer's application and claims history, including any appeals
records, if the information is linked or reasonably linkable to a
consumer or household, including via a device, by a business or service
provider.~~

\(~~l~~*p*) "Homepage" means the introductory page of an internet website
and any internet web page where personal information is collected. In
the case of an online service, such as a mobile application, homepage
means the application's platform page or download page, a link within
the application, such as from the application configuration, "About,"
"Information," or settings page, and any other location that allows
consumers to review the notice*s* required by ~~subdivision (a) of
Section 1798.135~~*this title*, including, but not limited to, before
downloading the application.

*(q) "Household" means a group, however identified, of consumers who
cohabitate with one another at the same residential address and share
use of common device(s) or service(s).*

\(~~m~~*r*) "Infer" or "inference" means the derivation of information,
data, assumptions, or conclusions from facts, evidence, or another
source of information or data.

*(s) "Intentionally interacts" means when the consumer intends to
interact with a person, or disclose personal information to a person,
via one or more deliberate interactions, such as visiting the person's
website or purchasing a good or service from the person. Hovering over,
muting, pausing, or closing a given piece of content does not constitute
a consumer's intent to interact with a person.*

*(t) "Non-personalized advertising" means advertising and marketing that
is based solely on a consumer's personal information derived from the
consumer's current interaction with the business, with the exception of
the consumer's precise geolocation.*

\(~~n~~*u*) "Person" means an individual, proprietorship, firm,
partnership, joint venture, syndicate, business trust, company,
corporation, limited liability company, association, committee, and any
other organization or group of persons acting in concert.

\(~~o~~*v*)

\(1) "Personal information" means information that identifies, relates
to, describes, is reasonably capable of being associated with, or could
reasonably be linked, directly or indirectly, with a particular consumer
or household. Personal information includes, but is not limited to, the
following if it identifies, relates to, describes, is reasonably capable
of being associated with, or could be reasonably linked, directly or
indirectly, with a particular consumer or household:

\(A) Identifiers such as a real name, alias, postal address, unique
personal identifier, online identifier, internet protocol address, email
address, account name, social security number, driver's license number,
passport number, or other similar identifiers.

\(B) Any ~~categories of~~ personal information described in subdivision
(e) of Section 1798.80.

\(C) Characteristics of protected classifications under California or
federal law.

\(D) Commercial information, including records of personal property,
products or services purchased, obtained, or considered, or other
purchasing or consuming histories or tendencies.

\(E) Biometric information.

\(F) Internet or other electronic network activity information,
including, but not limited to, browsing history, search history, and
information regarding a consumer's interaction with an internet website,
application, or advertisement.

\(G) Geolocation data.

\(H) Audio, electronic, visual, thermal, olfactory, or similar
information.

\(I) Professional or employment-related information.

\(J) Education information, defined as information that is not publicly
available personally identifiable information as defined in the Family
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (20 U.S.C. Sec. 1232g; 34 C.F.R. Part
99).

\(K) Inferences drawn from any of the information identified in this
subdivision to create a profile about a consumer reflecting the
consumer's preferences, characteristics, psychological trends,
predispositions, behavior, attitudes, intelligence, abilities, and
aptitudes.

*(L) Sensitive personal information.*

\(2) "Personal information" does not include publicly available
information *or lawfully obtained, truthful information that is a matter
of public concern*. For purposes of this paragraph, "publicly available"
means information that is lawfully made available from federal, state,
or local government records*, or information that a business has a
reasonable basis to believe is lawfully made available to the general
public by the consumer or from a widely distributed media, or by the
consumer; or information made available by a person to whom the consumer
has disclosed the information if the consumer has not restricted the
information to a specific audience*. "Publicly available" does not mean
biometric information collected by a business about a consumer without
the consumer's knowledge.

~~(3)~~ "Personal information" does not include consumer information
that is deidentified or aggregate consumer information.

*(w) "Precise geolocation" means any data that is derived from a device
and that is used or intended to be used to locate a consumer within a
geographic area that is equal to or less than the area of a circle with
a radius of one thousand, eight hundred and fifty (1,850) feet, except
as prescribed by regulations.*

\(~~p~~*x*) "Probabilistic identifier" means the identification of a
consumer or a *consumer's* device to a degree of certainty of more
probable than not based on any categories of personal information
included in, or similar to, the categories enumerated in the definition
of personal information.

\(~~q~~*y*) "Processing" means any operation or set of operations that
are performed on personal ~~data~~ *information* or on sets of personal
~~data~~ *information*, whether or not by automated means.

*(z) "Profiling" means any form of automated processing of personal
information, as further defined by regulations pursuant to paragraph
(16) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185, to evaluate certain
personal aspects relating to a natural person, and in particular to
analyze or predict aspects concerning that natural person's performance
at work, economic situation, health, personal preferences, interests,
reliability, behavior, location or movements.*

\(~~r~~*aa*) "Pseudonymize" or "Pseudonymization" means the processing of
personal information in a manner that renders the personal information
no longer attributable to a specific consumer without the use of
additional information, provided that the additional information is kept
separately and is subject to technical and organizational measures to
ensure that the personal information is not attributed to an identified
or identifiable consumer.

\(~~s~~*ab*) "Research" means scientific *analysis*, systematic study and
observation, including basic research or applied research that is
*designed to develop or contribute to public or scientific knowledge*
~~in the public interest~~ and that adheres *or otherwise conforms* to
all other applicable ethics and privacy laws*,* ~~or~~ *including but
not limited to* studies conducted in the public interest in the area of
public health. Research with personal information that may have been
collected from a consumer in the course of the consumer's interactions
with a business's service or device for other purposes shall be:

\(1) Compatible with the business purpose for which the personal
information was collected.

\(2) Subsequently pseudonymized and deidentified, or deidentified and in
the aggregate, such that the information cannot reasonably identify,
relate to, describe, be capable of being associated with, or be linked,
directly or indirectly, to a particular consumer*, by a business*.

\(3) Made subject to technical safeguards that prohibit reidentification
of the consumer to whom the information may pertain*, other than as
needed to support the research*.

\(4) Subject to business processes that specifically prohibit
reidentification of the information*, other than as needed to support
the research*.

\(5) Made subject to business processes to prevent inadvertent release of
deidentified information.

\(6) Protected from any reidentification attempts.

\(7) Used solely for research purposes that are compatible with the
context in which the personal information was collected.

\(8) ~~Not be used for any commercial purpose.~~

~~(9)~~ Subjected by the business conducting the research to additional
security controls that limit access to the research data to only those
individuals ~~in a business~~ as are necessary to carry out the research
purpose.

*(ac) "Security and integrity" means the ability:*

*(1) of a network or an information system to detect security incidents
that compromise the availability, authenticity, integrity, and
confidentiality of stored or transmitted personal information;*

*(2) to detect security incidents, resist malicious, deceptive,
fraudulent, or illegal actions, and to help prosecute those responsible
for such actions; and*

*(3) a business to ensure the physical safety of natural persons.*

\(~~t~~*ad*)

\(1) "Sell," "selling," "sale," or "sold," means selling, renting,
releasing, disclosing, disseminating, making available, transferring, or
otherwise communicating orally, in writing, or by electronic or other
means, a consumer's personal information by the business to ~~another
business or~~ a third party for monetary or other valuable
consideration.

\(2) For purposes of this title, a business does not sell personal
information when:

\(A) A consumer uses or directs the business to*:*

*(i)* intentionally disclose personal information*;* or

*(ii)* ~~uses the business to~~ intentionally interact with ~~a~~ *one
or more* third *~~party~~ parties;*~~, provided the third party does not
also sell the personal information, unless that disclosure would be
consistent with the provisions of this title. An intentional interaction
occurs when the consumer intends to interact with the third party, via
one or more deliberate interactions. Hovering over, muting, pausing, or
closing a given piece of content does not constitute a consumer's intent
to interact with a third party.~~

\(B) The business uses or shares an identifier for a consumer who has
opted out of the sale of the consumer's personal information *or limited
the use of the consumer's sensitive personal information* for the
purposes of alerting ~~third parties~~ *persons* that the consumer has
opted out of the sale of the consumer's personal information *or limited
the use of the consumer's sensitive personal information*~~.~~*; or*

~~(C) The business uses or shares with a service provider personal
information of a consumer that is necessary to perform a business
purpose if both of the following conditions are met:~~

~~(i) The business has provided notice of that information being used or
shared in its terms and conditions consistent with Section 1798.135.~~

~~(ii) The service provider does not further collect, sell, or use the
personal information of the consumer except as necessary to perform the
business purpose.~~

\(~~D~~*C*) The business transfers to a third party the personal
information of a consumer as an asset that is part of a merger,
acquisition, bankruptcy, or other transaction in which the third party
assumes control of all or part of the business, provided that
information is used or shared consistently with ~~Sections 1798.110 and
1798.115~~*this title*. If a third party materially alters how it uses
or shares the personal information of a consumer in a manner that is
materially inconsistent with the promises made at the time of
collection, it shall provide prior notice of the new or changed practice
to the consumer. The notice shall be sufficiently prominent and robust
to ensure that existing consumers can easily exercise their choices
consistently with ~~Section 1798.120~~*this title*. This subparagraph
does not authorize a business to make material, retroactive privacy
policy changes or make other changes in their privacy policy in a manner
that would violate the Unfair and Deceptive Practices Act (Chapter 5
(commencing with Section 17200) of Part 2 of Division 7 of the Business
and Professions Code).

*(ae)* *\"Sensitive personal information\" means:*

*(1) personal information that reveals*

*(A) a consumer\'s social security, driver\'s license, state
identification card, or passport number;*

*(B) a consumer\'s account log-in, financial account, debit card, or
credit card number in combination with any required security or access
code, password, or credentials allowing access to an account;*

*(C) a consumer\'s precise geolocation;*

*(D) a consumer\'s racial or ethnic origin, religious or philosophical
beliefs, or union membership;*

*(E) the contents of a consumer\'s mall, email and text messages, unless
the business is the intended recipient of the communication;*

*(F) a consumer\'s genetic data; and*

*(2)*

*(A) the processing of biometric information for the purpose of uniquely
identifying a consumer;*

*(B) personal information collected and analyzed concerning a
consumer\'s health; or*

*(C) personal information collected and analyzed concerning a
consumer\'s sex life or sexual orientation. Sensitive personal
information that is \"publicly available\" pursuant to paragraph (2) of
subdivision (v) of Section 1798.140 shall not be considered sensitive
personal information or personal information.*

\(~~u~~*af*) "Service" or "services" means work, labor, and services,
including services furnished in connection with the sale or repair of
goods.

\(~~v~~*ag*)

*(1)* "Service provider" means a ~~sole proprietorship, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, association, or other legal
entity that is organized or operated for the profit or financial benefit
of its shareholders or other owners,~~ *person* that processes
information on behalf of a business and ~~to~~ which *receives from or
on behalf of* the business ~~discloses~~ a consumer's personal
information for a business purpose pursuant to a written contract,
provided that the contract prohibits the ~~entity receiving the
information~~ *person* from*:*

*(A) selling or sharing the personal information;*

*(B)* retaining, using, or disclosing the personal information for any
purpose other than for the ~~specific purpose of performing the
services~~ *business purposes* specified in the contract for the
business, ~~or as otherwise permitted by this title,~~ including
retaining, using, or disclosing the personal information for a
commercial purpose other than ~~providing the services~~ *the business
purposes* specified in the contract with the business*, or as otherwise
permitted by this title;*

*(C) retaining, using, or disclosing the information outside of the
direct business relationship between the service provider and the
business; and*

*(D) combining the personal information which the service provider
receives from or on behalf of another person or person, or collects from
its own interaction with the consumer, provided that the service
provider may combine personal information to perform any business
purpose as defined in regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph (10) of
subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185, except as provided for in paragraph
(6) of subdivision (e) of this Section and in regulations adopted by the
California Privacy Protection Agency. The contract may, subject to
agreement with the service provider, permit the business to monitor the
service provider's compliance with the contract through measures
including, but not limited to, ongoing manual reviews and automated
scans, and regular assessments, audits, or other technical and
operational testing at least once every twelve (12) months*.

*(2) If a service provider engages any other person to assist it in
processing personal information for a business purpose on behalf of the
business, or if any other person engaged by the service provider engages
another person to assist in processing personal information for such
business purpose, it shall notify the business of such engagement, and
the engagement shall be pursuant to a written contract binding the other
person to observe all the requirements set forth in paragraph (1).*

*(ah)*

*(1) \"Share,\" \"shared,\" or \"sharing\" means sharing, renting,
releasing, disclosing, disseminating, making available, transferring, or
otherwise communicating orally, in writing, or by electronic or other
means, a consumer\'s personal information by the business to a third
party for cross-context behavioral advertising, whether or not for
monetary or other valuable consideration, including transactions between
a business and a third party for cross-context behavioral advertising
for the benefit of a business in which no money is exchanged.*

*(2) For purposes of this title, a business does not share personal
information when:*

*(A) A consumer uses or directs the business to:*

*(i) intentionally disclose personal information; or*

*(ii) intentionally interact with one or more third parties;*

*(B) The business uses or shares an identifier for a consumer who has
opted out of the sharing of the consumer\'s personal information or
limited the use of the consumer\'s sensitive personal information for
the purposes of alerting persons that the consumer has opted out of the
sharing of the consumer\'s personal information or limited the use of
the consumer\'s sensitive personal information; or*

*(C) The business transfers to a third party the personal information of
a consumer as an asset that is part of a merger, acquisition,
bankruptcy, or other transaction in which the third party assumes
control of all or part of the business, provided that information is
used or shared consistently with this title. If a third party materially
alters how it uses or shores the personal information of a consumer in a
manner that is materially inconsistent with the promises made at the
time of collection, it shall provide prior notice of the new or changed
practice to the consumer. The notice shall be sufficiently prominent and
robust to ensure that existing consumers can easily exercise their
choices consistently with this title. This subparagraph does not
authorize a business to make material, retroactive privacy policy
changes or make other changes in their privacy policy in a manner that
would violate the Unfair and Deceptive Practices Act (Chapter 5
(commencing with Section 17200) of Part 2 of Division 7 of the Business
and Professions Code).*

\(~~w~~*ai*) "Third party" means a person who is not any of the
following:

\(1) The business ~~with whom the consumer intentionally interacts and~~
that collects personal information from ~~consumers~~ *the consumer as
part of the consumer's current interaction with the business* under this
title~~.*;*~~

\(2) *A service provider to the business; or*

*(3) A contractor.*

~~(A) A person to whom the business discloses a consumer's personal
information for a business purpose pursuant to a written contract,
provided that the contract:~~

~~(i) Prohibits the person receiving the personal information from:~~

~~(I) Selling the personal information.~~

~~(II) Retaining, using, or disclosing the personal information for any
purpose other than for the specific purpose of performing the services
specified in the contract, including retaining, using, or disclosing the
personal information for a commercial purpose other than providing the
services specified in the contract.~~

~~(III) Retaining, using, or disclosing the information outside of the
direct business relationship between the person and the business.~~

~~(ii) Includes a certification made by the person receiving the
personal information that the person understands the restrictions in
subparagraph (A) and will comply with them.~~

~~(B) A person covered by this paragraph that violates any of the
restrictions set forth in this title shall be liable for the violations.
A business that discloses personal information to a person covered by
this paragraph in compliance with this paragraph shall not be liable
under this title if the person receiving the personal information uses
it in violation of the restrictions set forth in this title, provided
that, at the time of disclosing the personal information, the business
does not have actual knowledge, or reason to believe, that the person
intends to commit such a violation.~~

\(~~x~~*aj*) "Unique identifier" or "Unique personal identifier" means a
persistent identifier that can be used to recognize a consumer, a
family, or a device that is linked to a consumer or family, over time
and across different services, including, but not limited to, a device
identifier; an Internet Protocol address; cookies, beacons, pixel tags,
mobile ad identifiers, or similar technology; customer number, unique
pseudonym, or user alias; telephone numbers, or other forms of
persistent or probabilistic identifiers that can be used to identify a
particular consumer or device *that is linked to a consumer or family*.
For purposes of this subdivision, "family" means a custodial parent or
guardian and any ~~minor~~ children *under 18 years of age* over which
the parent or guardian has custody.

\(~~y~~*ak*) "Verifiable consumer request" means a request that is made
by a consumer, by a consumer on behalf of the consumer's minor child, or
by a natural person or a person registered with the Secretary of State,
authorized by the consumer to act on the consumer's behalf, *or by a
person who has power of attorney or is acting as a conservator for the
consumer,* and that the business can ~~reasonably~~ verify, *using
commercially reasonable methods,* pursuant to regulations adopted by the
Attorney General pursuant to paragraph (7) of subdivision (a) of Section
1798.185 to be the consumer about whom the business has collected
personal information. A business is not obligated to provide information
to the consumer pursuant to Sections 1798.100, 1798.105, 1798.110, and
1798.115*, to delete personal information pursuant to Section 1798.105,
or to correct inaccurate personal information pursuant to Section
1798.106,* if the business cannot verify, pursuant to this subdivision
and regulations adopted by the Attorney General pursuant to paragraph
(7) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185, that the consumer making the
request is the consumer about whom the business has collected
information or is a person authorized by the consumer to act on such
consumer's behalf.

*SEC. 15. Section 1798.145 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.145. Exemptions*

1798.145

\(a) The obligations imposed on businesses by this title shall not
restrict a business' ability to:

\(1) Comply with federal, state, or local laws *or comply with a court
order or subpoena to provide information*.

\(2) Comply with a civil, criminal, or regulatory inquiry, investigation,
subpoena, or summons by federal, state, or local authorities. *Law
enforcement agencies, including police and sheriffs departments, may
direct a business pursuant to a law enforcement agency-approved
investigation with an active case number not to delete a consumer\'s
personal information and upon receipt of such direction a business shall
not delete the personal information for 90 days, in order to allow the
law enforcement agency to obtain a court-issued subpoena, order, or
warrant to obtain a consumer\'s personal information. For good cause and
only to the extent necessary for investigatory purposes, law enforcement
agency may direct a business not to delete the consumer\'s personal
information for additional 90 day periods. A business that has received
direction from a law enforcement agency not to delete the personal
information of a consumer who has requested deletion of the consumer\'s
personal information shall not use the consumer\'s personal information
for any purpose other than retaining it to produce to law enforcement in
response to a court-issued subpoena, order, or warrant, unless the
consumer\'s deletion request is subject to an exemption from deletion
under this title.*

\(3) Cooperate with law enforcement agencies concerning conduct or
activity that the business, service provider, or third party reasonably
and in good faith believes may violate federal, state, or local law.

*(4) Cooperate with a government agency request for emergency access to
a consumer\'s personal information if a natural person is at risk or
danger of death or serious physical injury, provided that:*

*(A) the request is approved by a high-ranking agency officer for
emergency access to a consumer\'s personal information;*

*(B) the request is based on the agency\'s good faith determination that
it has a lawful basis to access the information on a non-emergency
basis; and*

*(C) the agency agrees to petition a court for an appropriate order
within three days and to destroy the information if that order is not
granted.*

\(~~4~~*5*) Exercise or defend legal claims.

\(~~5~~*6*) Collect, use, retain, sell, *share,* or disclose consumer*s'*
*personal* information that is deidentified or in the aggregate consumer
information.

\(~~6~~*7*) Collect*,* ~~or~~ sell*, or share* a consumer's personal
information if every aspect of that commercial conduct takes place
wholly outside of California. For purposes of this title, commercial
conduct takes place wholly outside of California if the business
collected that information while the consumer was outside of California,
no part of the sale of the consumer's personal information occurred in
California, and no personal information collected while the consumer was
in California is sold. This paragraph shall not ~~permit~~ *prohibit* a
business from storing, including on a device, personal information about
a consumer when the consumer is in California and then collecting that
personal information when the consumer and stored personal information
is outside of California.

\(b) The obligations imposed on businesses by Sections 1798.110*,
1798.115, 1798.120, 1798.121, 1798.130,* ~~to~~ *and* 1798.135,
inclusive, shall not apply where compliance by the business with the
title would violate an evidentiary privilege under California law and
shall not prevent a business from providing the personal information of
a consumer to a person covered by an evidentiary privilege under
California law as part of a privileged communication.

\(c)

\(1) This title shall not apply to any of the following:

\(A) Medical information governed by the Confidentiality of Medical
Information Act (Part 2.6 (commencing with Section 56) of Division 1) or
protected health information that is collected by a covered entity or
business associate governed by the privacy, security, and breach
notification rules issued by the United States Department of Health and
Human Services, Parts 160 and 164 of Title 45 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, established pursuant to the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191) and the Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (Public Law
111-5).

\(B) A provider of health care governed by the Confidentiality of Medical
Information Act (Part 2.6 (commencing with Section 56) of Division 1) or
a covered entity governed by the privacy, security, and breach
notification rules issued by the United States Department of Health and
Human Services, Parts 160 and 164 of Title 45 of the Code of Federal
Regulations, established pursuant to the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-191), to the extent the
provider or covered entity maintains patient information in the same
manner as medical information or protected health information as
described in subparagraph (A) of this section.

\(C) *Personal* information collected as part of a clinical trial *or
other biomedical research study* subject to *or conducted in accordance
with* the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, also
known as the Common Rule, pursuant to good clinical practice guidelines
issued by the International Council for Harmonisation or pursuant to
human subject protection requirements of the United States Food and Drug
Administration*, provided that such information is not sold or shared in
a manner not permitted by this subparagraph, and if it is inconsistent,
that the participants be informed of such use and provide consent*.

\(2) For purposes of this subdivision, the definitions of "medical
information" and "provider of health care" in Section 56.05 shall apply
and the definitions of "business associate," "covered entity," and
"protected health information" in Section 160.103 of Title 45 of the
Code of Federal Regulations shall apply.

\(d)

\(1) This title shall not apply to an activity involving the collection,
maintenance, disclosure, sale, communication, or use of any personal
information bearing on a consumer's credit worthiness, credit standing,
credit capacity, character, general reputation, personal
characteristics, or mode of living by a consumer reporting agency, as
defined in subdivision (f) of Section 1681a of Title 15 of the United
States Code, by a furnisher of information, as set forth in Section
1681s-2 of Title 15 of the United States Code, who provides information
for use in a consumer report, as defined in subdivision (d) of Section
1681a of Title 15 of the United States Code, and by a user of a consumer
report as set forth in Section 1681b of Title 15 of the United States
Code.

\(2) Paragraph (1) shall apply only to the extent that such activity
involving the collection, maintenance, disclosure, sale, communication,
or use of such information by that agency, furnisher, or user is subject
to regulation under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, section 1681 et seq.,
Title 15 of the United States Code and the information is not used,
communicated, disclosed, or sold except as authorized by the Fair Credit
Reporting Act.

\(3) This subdivision shall not apply to Section 1798.150.

\(e) This title shall not apply to personal information collected,
processed, sold, or disclosed ~~pursuant~~ *subject* to the federal
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (Public Law 106-102), and implementing
regulations, or the California Financial Information Privacy Act
(Division 1.4 (commencing with Section 4050) of the Financial Code)*, or
the Federal Farm Credit Act of 1971 (as amended in 12 U.S.C. Sections
2001 -- 2279cc and implementing regulations, 12 Code of Federal
Regulations, Parts 600, et seq.)*. This subdivision shall not apply to
Section 1798.150.

\(f) This title shall not apply to personal information collected,
processed, sold, or disclosed pursuant to the Driver's Privacy
Protection Act of 1994 (18 U.S.C. Sec. 2721 et seq.). This subdivision
shall not apply to Section 1798.150.

\(g)

\(1) Section 1798.120 shall not apply to vehicle information or ownership
information retained or shared between a new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in Section 426 of the Vehicle Code, and the vehicle's
manufacturer, as defined in Section 672 of the Vehicle Code, if the
vehicle or ownership information is shared for the purpose of
effectuating, or in anticipation of effectuating, a vehicle repair
covered by a vehicle warranty or a recall conducted pursuant to Sections
30118 to 30120, inclusive, of Title 49 of the United States Code,
provided that the new motor vehicle dealer or vehicle manufacturer with
which that vehicle information or ownership information is shared does
not sell, share, or use that information for any other purpose.

\(2) For purposes of this subdivision:

\(A) "Vehicle information" means the vehicle information number, make,
model, year, and odometer reading.

\(B) "Ownership information" means the name or names of the registered
owner or owners and the contact information for the owner or owners.

\(h)

\(1) This title shall not apply to any of the following:

\(A) Personal information that is collected by a business about a natural
person in the course of the natural person acting as a job applicant to,
an employee of, owner of, director of, officer of, medical staff member
of, or contractor of that business to the extent that the natural
person's personal information is collected and used by the business
solely within the context of the natural person's role or former role as
a job applicant to, an employee of, owner of, director of, officer of,
medical staff member of, or a contractor of that business.

\(B) Personal information that is collected by a business that is
emergency contact information of the natural person acting as a job
applicant to, an employee of, owner of, director of, officer of, medical
staff member of, or contractor of that business to the extent that the
personal information is collected and used solely within the context of
having an emergency contact on file.

\(C) Personal information that is necessary for the business to retain to
administer benefits for another natural person relating to the natural
person acting as a job applicant to, an employee of, owner of, director
of, officer of, medical staff member of, or contractor of that business
to the extent that the personal information is collected and used solely
within the context of administering those benefits.

\(2) For purposes of this subdivision:

\(A) "Contractor" means a natural person who provides any service to a
business pursuant to a written contract.

\(B) "Director" means a natural person designated in the articles of
incorporation as such or elected by the incorporators and natural
persons designated, elected, or appointed by any other name or title to
act as directors, and their successors.

\(C) "Medical staff member" means a licensed physician and surgeon,
dentist, or podiatrist, licensed pursuant to Division 2 (commencing with
Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code and a clinical
psychologist as defined in Section 1316.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

\(D) "Officer" means a natural person elected or appointed by the board
of directors to manage the daily operations of a corporation, such as a
chief executive officer, president, secretary, or treasurer.

\(E) "Owner" means a natural person who meets one of the following:

\(i) Has ownership of, or the power to vote, more than 50 percent of the
outstanding shares of any class of voting security of a business.

\(ii) Has control in any manner over the election of a majority of the
directors or of individuals exercising similar functions.

\(iii) Has the power to exercise a controlling influence over the
management of a company.

\(3) This subdivision shall not apply to subdivision (b) of Section
1798.100 or Section 1798.150.

\(4) This subdivision shall become inoperative on January 1, ~~2021~~
*2023*.

\(i) Notwithstanding a business' obligations to respond to and honor
consumer rights requests pursuant to this title:

\(1) A time period for a business to respond to *a consumer for* any
~~verified~~ *verifiable* consumer request may be extended by up to *a
total of* 90 ~~additional~~ days where necessary, taking into account
the complexity and number of the requests. The business shall inform the
consumer of any such extension within 45 days of receipt of the request,
together with the reasons for the delay.

\(2) If the business does not take action on the request of the consumer,
the business shall inform the consumer, without delay and at the latest
within the time period permitted of response by this section, of the
reasons for not taking action and any rights the consumer may have to
appeal the decision to the business.

\(3) If requests from a consumer are manifestly unfounded or excessive,
in particular because of their repetitive character, a business may
either charge a reasonable fee, taking into account the administrative
costs of providing the information or communication or taking the action
requested, or refuse to act on the request and notify the consumer of
the reason for refusing the request. The business shall bear the burden
of demonstrating that any ~~verified~~ *verifiable* consumer request is
manifestly unfounded or excessive.

\(j)

*(1)* A business that discloses personal information to a service
provider *or contractor in compliance with this title* shall not be
liable under this title if the service provider *or contractor*
receiving the personal information uses it in violation of the
restrictions set forth in the title, provided that, at the time of
disclosing the personal information, the business does not have actual
knowledge, or reason to believe, that the service provider *or
contractor* intends to commit such a violation. A service provider *or
contractor* shall likewise not be liable under this title for the
obligations of a business for which it provides services as set forth in
this title*, provided that the service provider or contractor shall be
liable for its own violations of this title*.

*(2)* *A business that discloses personal information of a consumer,
with the exception of consumers who have exercised their right to
opt-out of the sale or sharing of their personal information, consumers
who have limited the use or disclosure of their sensitive personal
information, and minor consumers who have not opted-in to the collection
or sale of their personal information, to a third party pursuant to a
written contract that requires the third party to provide the same level
of protection of the consumer\'s rights under this title as provided by
the business shall not be liable under this title if the third party
receiving the personal information uses it in violation of the
restrictions set forth in the title, provided that, at the time of
disclosing the personal information, the business does not have actual
knowledge, or reason to believe, that the third party intends to commit
such a violation.*

\(k) This title shall not be construed to require a business*, service
provider, or contractor* to*:*

*(1) reidentify or otherwise link information that, in the ordinary
course of business, s not maintained in a manner that would be
considered personal information;*

*(2) retain any personal information about a consumer if, in the
ordinary course of business, that information about the consumer would
not be retained; or*

*(3) maintain information in identifiable, linkable or associable form,
or collect, obtain, retain, or access any data or technology, in order
to be capable of linking or associating a verifiable consumer request
with personal information.*

~~collect personal information that it would not otherwise collect in
the ordinary course of its business, retain personal information for
longer than it would otherwise retain such information in the ordinary
course of its business, or reidentify or otherwise link information that
is not maintained in a manner that would be considered personal
information.~~

\(l) The rights afforded to consumers and the obligations imposed on the
business in this title shall not adversely affect the rights and
freedoms of other ~~consumers~~ *natural persons. A verifiable consumer
request for specific pieces of personal information pursuant to section
1798.110, to delete a consumer's personal information pursuant to
Section 1798.105, or to correct inaccurate personal information pursuant
to Section 1798.106, shall not extend to personal information about the
consumer that belongs to, or the business maintains on behalf of,
another natural person. A business may rely on representations made in a
verifiable consumer request as to rights with respect to personal
information and is under no legal requirement to seek out other persons
that may have or claim to have rights to personal information, and a
business is under no legal obligation under this title or any other
provision of law to take any action under this title in the event of a
dispute between or among persons claiming rights to personal information
in the business's possession.*

\(m) The rights afforded to consumers and the obligations imposed on any
business under this title shall not apply to the extent that they
infringe on the noncommercial activities of a person or entity described
in subdivision (b) of Section 2 of Article I of the California
Constitution.

\(n)

\(1) The obligations imposed on businesses by Sections 1798.100,
1798.105, 1798.110, 1798.115, 1798.130, and 1798.135 shall not apply to
personal information reflecting a written or verbal communication or a
transaction between the business and the consumer, where the consumer is
a natural person who is acting as an employee, owner, director, officer,
or contractor of a company, partnership, sole proprietorship,
non-profit, or government agency and whose communications or transaction
with the business occur solely within the context of the business
conducting due diligence regarding, or providing or receiving a product
or service to or from such company, partnership, sole proprietorship,
non-profit or government agency.

\(2) For purposes of this subdivision:

\(A) "Contractor" means a natural person who provides any service to a
business pursuant to a written contract.

\(B) "Director" means a natural person designated in the articles of
incorporation as such or elected by the incorporators and natural
persons designated, elected, or appointed by any other name or title to
act as directors, and their successors.

\(C) "Officer" means a natural person elected or appointed by the board
of directors to manage the daily operations of a corporation, such as a
chief executive officer, president, secretary, or treasurer.

\(D) "Owner" means a natural person who meets one of the following:

\(i) Has ownership of, or the power to vote, more than 50 percent of the
outstanding shares of any class of voting security of a business.

\(ii) Has control in any manner over the election of a majority of the
directors or of individuals exercising similar functions.

\(iii) Has the power to exercise a controlling influence over the
management of a company.

\(3) This subdivision shall become inoperative on January 1,
~~2021~~*2023*.

*(o)*

*(1) Sections 1798.105 and 1798.120 shall not apply to a commercial
credit reporting agency\'s collection, processing, sale, or disclosure
of business controller information to the extent the commercial credit
reporting agency uses the business controller information solely to
Identify the relationship of a consumer to a business which the consumer
owns or contact the consumer only in the consumer\'s role as the owner,
director, officer, or management employee of the business.*

*(2) For the purposes of this subdivision:*

*(A) \"Business controller information\" means the name or names of the
owner or owners, director, officer, or management employee of a
business, and the contact information, including a business title, for
the owner or owners, director, officer, or management employee.*

*(B) \"Commercial credit reporting agency\" has the meaning set forth
subdivision (b) of Section 1785.42,*

*(C) \"Owner or owners\" means a natural person that meets one of the
following:*

*(i) Has ownership at or the power to vote, more than 50 percent of the
outstanding shares of any class of voting security of a business,*

*(ii) Has control in any manner over the election of a majority of the
directors, or of individuals exercising similar functions.*

*(iii) Has the power to exercise a controlling influence over the
management of a company.*

*(C) \"Director\" means a natural person designated in the articles of
incorporation of a business as such or elected by the incorporators and
natural persons designated, elected or appointed by any other name or
title to act as directors, and their successors.*

*(D) \"Officer\" means a natural person elected or appointed by the
board of directors of a business to manage the daily operations of a
corporation, such as a chief executive officer, president, secretary, or
treasurer.*

*(E) \"Management employee\" means a natural person whose name and
contact information is reported to or collected by a commercial credit
reporting agency as the primary manager of a business and used solely
within the context of the natural person\'s role as the primary manager
of the business.*

*(p) The obligations imposed on businesses in Sections 1798.105,
1798.106, 1798.110, and 1798.115 inclusive, shall not apply to household
data.*

*(q)*

*(1) This title does not require a business to comply with a verifiable
consumer request to delete a consumer\'s personal information under
Section 1798.105 to the extent the verifiable consumer request applies
to a student\'s grades, educational scores, or educational test results
that the business holds on behalf of a local educational agency, as
defined in subdivision (d) of Section 49073.1 of the Education Code, at
which the student is currently enrolled. If a business does not comply
with a request pursuant to this section, it shall notify the consumer
that it is acting pursuant to this exception,*

*(2) This title does not require, in response to a request pursuant to
Section 1798.110, that a business disclose an educational standardized
assessment or educational assessment or a consumer\'s specific responses
to the educational standardized assessment or educational assessment
where consumer access, possession or control would jeopardize the
validity and reliability of that educational standardized assessment or
educational assessment. If a business does not comply with a request
pursuant to this section, it shall notify the consumer that it is acting
pursuant to this exception.*

*(3) For purposes of this subdivision:*

*(A) \"Educational standardized assessment or educational assessment\"
means a standardized or non-standardized quiz, test, or other assessment
used to evaluate students in or for entry to K-12 schools,
post-secondary institutions, vocational programs, and postgraduate
programs which are accredited by an accrediting agency or organization
recognized by the state of California or the United States Department of
Education, as well as certification and licensure examinations used to
determine competency and eligibility to receive certification or
licensure from a government agency or government certification body.*

*(B) \"Jeopardize the validity and reliability of that educational
standardized assessment or educational assessment\" means releasing
information that would provide an advantage to the consumer who has
submitted a verifiable consumer request or to another natural person.*

*(r) Sections 1798.105 and 1798.120 shall not apply to a business\'s
use, disclosure, or sale of particular pieces of a consumer\'s personal
information if the consumer has consented to the business\'s use,
disclosure, or sale of that information to produce a physical item such
as a school yearbook containing the consumer\'s photograph if:*

*(1) The business has incurred significant expense in reliance on the
consumer\'s consent;*

*(2) Compliance with the consumer\'s request to opt-out of the sale of
the consumer\'s personal information or to delete the consumer\'s
personal information would not be commercially reasonable; and*

*(3) The business complies with the consumer\'s request as soon as it is
commercially reasonable to do so.*

*SEC. 16. Section 1798.150 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.150. Personal Information Security Breaches*

1798.150

\(a)

\(1) Any consumer whose nonencrypted and nonredacted personal
information, as defined in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of
subdivision (d) of Section 1798.81.5, *or whose email address in
combination with a password or security question and answer that would
permit access to the account,* is subject to an unauthorized access and
exfiltration, theft, or disclosure as a result of the business's
violation of the duty to implement and maintain reasonable security
procedures and practices appropriate to the nature of the information to
protect the personal information may institute a civil action for any of
the following:

\(A) To recover damages in an amount not less than one hundred dollars
(\$100) and not greater than seven hundred and fifty (\$750) per
consumer per incident or actual damages, whichever is greater.

\(B) Injunctive or declaratory relief.

\(C) Any other relief the court deems proper.

\(2) In assessing the amount of statutory damages, the court shall
consider any one or more of the relevant circumstances presented by any
of the parties to the case, including, but not limited to, the nature
and seriousness of the misconduct, the number of violations, the
persistence of the misconduct, the length of time over which the
misconduct occurred, the willfulness of the defendant's misconduct, and
the defendant's assets, liabilities, and net worth.

\(b) Actions pursuant to this section may be brought by a consumer if,
prior to initiating any action against a business for statutory damages
on an individual or class-wide basis, a consumer provides a business 30
days' written notice identifying the specific provisions of this title
the consumer alleges have been or are being violated. In the event a
cure is possible, if within the 30 days the business actually cures the
noticed violation and provides the consumer an express written statement
that the violations have been cured and that no further violations shall
occur, no action for individual statutory damages or class-wide
statutory damages may be initiated against the business. *The
implementation and maintenance of reasonable security procedures and
practices pursuant to Section 1798.81.5 following a breach does not
constitute a cure with respect to that breach.* No notice shall be
required prior to an individual consumer initiating an action solely for
actual pecuniary damages suffered as a result of the alleged violations
of this title. If a business continues to violate this title in breach
of the express written statement provided to the consumer under this
section, the consumer may initiate an action against the business to
enforce the written statement and may pursue statutory damages for each
breach of the express written statement, as well as any other violation
of the title that postdates the written statement.

\(c) The cause of action established by this section shall apply only to
violations as defined in subdivision (a) and shall not be based on
violations of any other section of this title. Nothing in this title
shall be interpreted to serve as the basis for a private right of action
under any other law. This shall not be construed to relieve any party
from any duties or obligations imposed under other law or the United
States or California Constitution.

*SEC. 17. Section 1798.155 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.155. Administrative Enforcement*

1798.155

\(a) ~~Any business or third party may seek the opinion of the Attorney
General for guidance on how to comply with the provisions of this
title.~~

~~(b) A business shall be in violation of this title if it fails to cure
any alleged violation within 30 days after being notified of alleged
noncompliance.~~ Any business, service provider, *contractor* or other
person that violates this title shall be ~~subject to an injunction
and~~ liable for *an administrative fine of not more than two thousand
five hundred dollars (\$2,500) for each violation, or seven thousand
five hundred dollars (\$7,500) for each intentional violation or
violations involving the personal information of consumers whom the
business, service provider, contractor or other person has actual
knowledge is under 16 years of age, as adjusted pursuant to paragraph
(5) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185, in an administrative
enforcement action brought by the California Privacy Protection Agency.*
~~a civil penalty of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars
(\$2,500) for each violation or seven thousand five hundred dollars
(\$7,500) for each intentional violation, which shall be assessed and
recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people of the
State of California by the Attorney General. The civil penalties
provided for in this section shall be exclusively assessed and recovered
in a civil action brought in the name of the people of the State of
California by the Attorney General.~~

\(~~c~~*b*) Any ~~civil penalty~~ *administrative fine* assessed for a
violation of this title, and the proceeds of any settlement of an action
brought pursuant to subdivision (~~b~~*a*), shall be deposited in the
Consumer Privacy Fund, created within the General Fund pursuant to
subdivision (a) of Section 1798.160 with the intent to fully offset any
costs incurred by the state courts and the Attorney General *and the
California Privacy Protection Agency* in connection with this title.

*SEC. 18. Section 1798.160 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.160. Consumer Privacy Fund*

1798.160

\(a) A special fund to be known as the "Consumer Privacy Fund" is hereby
created within the General Fund in the State Treasury, and is available
upon appropriation by the Legislature *first* to offset any costs
incurred by the state courts in connection with actions brought to
enforce this title*, the* ~~and any~~ costs incurred by the Attorney
General in carrying out the Attorney General's duties under this title*,
and then for the purposes of establishing an investment fund in the
State Treasury, with any earnings or interest from the fund to be
deposited in the General Fund, and making grants to promote and protect
consumer privacy, educate children in the area of online privacy, and
fund cooperative programs with international law enforcement
organizations to combat fraudulent activities with respect to consumer
data breaches*.

\(b) Funds transferred to the Consumer Privacy Fund shall be used
exclusively *as follows:*

\(1) to offset any costs incurred by the state courts and the Attorney
    General in connection with this title.

*(2) after satisfying the obligations under paragraph (1), the remaining
funds shall be allocated each fiscal year as follows:*

*(A) ninety-one percent (91%) shall be invested by the Treasurer in
financial assets with the goal of maximizing long term yields consistent
with a prudent level of risk; the principal shall not be subject to
transfer or appropriation, provided that any interest and earnings shall
be transferred on an annual basis to the General Fund for appropriation
by the Legislature for General Fund purposes; and*

*(B) nine percent (9%) shall be made available to the California Privacy
Protection Agency for the purposes of making grants in California, with
three percent (3%) allocated to each of the following grant recipients:
*

*(i) non-profit organizations to promote and protect consumer privacy;*

*(ii) non-profit organizations and public agencies, including school
districts, to educate children in the area of online privacy; and*

*(iii) state and local law enforcement agencies to fund cooperative
programs with international law enforcement organizations to combat
fraudulent activities with respect to consumer data breaches.*

*(c)* ~~These funds~~ *Funds in the Consumer Privacy Fund* shall not be
subject to appropriation or transfer by the Legislature for any other
purpose*.*~~, unless the Director of Finance determines that the funds
are in excess of the funding needed to fully offset the costs incurred
by the state courts and the Attorney General in connection with this
title, in which case the Legislature may appropriate excess funds for
other purposes.~~

*SEC. 19. Section 1798.175 of the Civil Code is hereby reenacted to
read:*

*1798.175. Conflicting Provisions*

1798.175

This title is intended to further the constitutional right of privacy
and to supplement existing laws relating to consumers' personal
information, including, but not limited to, Chapter 22 (commencing with
Section 22575) of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code and
Title 1.81 (commencing with Section 1798.80). The provisions of this
title are not limited to information collected electronically or over
the Internet, but apply to the collection and sale of all personal
information collected by a business from consumers. Wherever possible,
law relating to consumers' personal information should be construed to
harmonize with the provisions of this title, but in the event of a
conflict between other laws and the provisions of this title, the
provisions of the law that afford the greatest protection for the right
of privacy for consumers shall control.

*Section 1798.180 of the Civil Code is hereby reenacted to read:*

*1798.180. Preemption*

1798.180

This title is a matter of statewide concern and supersedes and preempts
all rules, regulations, codes, ordinances, and other laws adopted by a
city, county, city and county, municipality, or local agency regarding
the collection and sale of consumers' personal information by a
business.

*Section 1798.185 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.185. Regulations*

1798.185

\(a) On or before July 1, 2020, the Attorney General shall solicit broad
public participation and adopt regulations to further the purposes of
this title, including, but not limited to, the following areas:

\(1) Updating *or adding* ~~as needed additional~~ categories of personal
information to those enumerated in subdivision (c) of Section 1798.130
and subdivision (~~o~~*v*) of Section 1798.140*, and updating or adding
categories of sensitive personal information to those enumerated in
subdivision (ae) of Section 1798.140,* in order to address changes in
technology, data collection practices, obstacles to implementation, and
privacy concerns.

\(2) Updating as needed the definition*s* of *"deidentified" and "*unique
identifier"~~s~~ to address changes in technology, data collection,
obstacles to implementation, and privacy concerns, and *adding,
modifying, or deleting*~~additional~~ categories to the definition of
designated methods for submitting requests to facilitate a consumer's
ability to obtain information from a business pursuant to Section
1798.130. *The authority to update the definition of "deidentified"
shall not apply to deidentification standards set forth in Section
164.514 of Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations, where such
information previously was "protected health information" as defined in
Section 160.103 of that title.*

\(3) Establishing any exceptions necessary to comply with state or
federal law, including, but not limited to, those relating to trade
secrets and intellectual property rights, within one year of passage of
this title and as needed thereafter*, with the intention that trade
secrets should not be disclosed in response to a verifiable consumer
request*.

\(4) Establishing rules and procedures for the following:

\(A) To facilitate and govern the submission of a request by a consumer
to opt-out of the sale *or sharing* of personal information pursuant to
Section 1798.120 *and to limit the use of a consumer's sensitive
personal information pursuant to section 1798.121 to ensure that
consumers have the ability to exercise their choices without undue
burden and to prevent business from engaging in deceptive or harassing
conduct, including in retaliation against consumers for exercising their
rights, while allowing businesses to inform consumers of the
consequences of their decision to opt-out of the sale or sharing of
their personal information or to limit the use of their sensitive
personal information*.

\(B) To govern business compliance with a consumer's opt-out request.

\(C) For the development and use of a recognizable and uniform opt-out
logo or button by all businesses to promote consumer awareness of the
opportunity to opt-out of the sale of personal information.

\(5) Adjusting the monetary threshold*s, in January of every odd-numbered
year to reflect any increase in the Consumer Price Index,* in
subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (~~c~~*d*) of Section
1798.140*; subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of
Section 1798.150; subdivision (A) of Section 1798.155; Section
1798.199.25; and subdivision (a) of section 1798.199.90*~~in January of
every odd-numbered year to reflect any increase in the Consumer Price
Index~~.

\(6) Establishing rules, procedures, and any exceptions necessary to
ensure that the notices and information that businesses are required to
provide pursuant to this title are provided in a manner that may be
easily understood by the average consumer, are accessible to consumers
with disabilities, and are available in the language primarily used to
interact with the consumer, including establishing rules and guidelines
regarding financial incentive ~~offering~~s, within one year of passage
of this title and as needed thereafter.

\(7) Establishing rules and procedures to further the purposes of
Sections *1798.105, 1798.106,* 1798.110 and 1798.115 and to facilitate a
consumer's or the consumer's authorized agent's ability to *delete
personal information, correct inaccurate personal information pursuant
to Section 1798.106, or* obtain information pursuant to Section
1798.130, with the goal of minimizing the administrative burden on
consumers, taking into account available technology, security concerns,
and the burden on the business, to govern a business's determination
that a request for information received from a consumer is a verifiable
consumer request, including treating a request submitted through a
password-protected account maintained by the consumer with the business
while the consumer is logged into the account as a verifiable consumer
request and providing a mechanism for a consumer who does not maintain
an account with the business to request information through the
business's authentication of the consumer's identity, within one year of
passage of this title and as needed thereafter.

*(8) Establishing how often, and under what circumstances, a consumer
may request a correction pursuant to Section 1798.106, including
standards governing:*

*(A) how a business responds to a request for correction, including
exceptions for requests to which a response is impossible or would
involve disproportionate effort, and requests for correction of accurate
information;*

*(B) how concerns regarding the accuracy of the information may be
resolved;*

*(C) the steps a business may take to prevent fraud; and*

*(D) if a business rejects a request to correct personal information
collected and analyzed concerning a consumer\'s health, the right of a
consumer to provide a written addendum to the business with respect to
any item or statement regarding any such personal information that the
consumer believes to be incomplete or incorrect. The addendum shall be
limited to 250 words per alleged incomplete or incorrect item and shall
clearly indicate in writing that the consumer requests the addendum to
be mode a port of the consumer\'s record.*

*(9) Establishing the standard to govern a business\'s determination,
pursuant to subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (o) of
Section 1798.130, that providing information beyond the 12-month period
in a response to a verifiable consumer request is impossible or would
involve a disproportionate effort.*

*(10) Issuing regulations further defining and adding to the business
purposes, including other notified purposes, for which businesses,
service providers, and contractors may use consumers\' personal
information consistent with consumers\' expectations, and further
defining the business purposes for which service providers and
contractors may combine consumers\' personal information obtained from
different sources, except as provided for in paragraph (6) of
subdivision (e) of Section 1798.140.*

*(11) Issuing regulations identifying those business purposes, including
other notified purposes, for which service providers and contractors may
use consumers\' personal information received pursuant to a written
contract with a business, for the service provider or contractor\'s own
business purposes, with the goal of maximizing consumer privacy.*

*(12) Issuing regulations to further define \"intentionally interacts,\"
with the goal of maximizing consumer privacy.*

*(13) Issuing regulations to further define \"precise geolocation,\"
such as where the size defined is not sufficient to protect consumer
privacy in sparsely populated areas, or when the personal information is
used for normal operational purposes, such as billing.*

*(14) Issuing regulations to define the term \"specific pieces of
information obtained from the consumer\" with the goal of maximizing a
consumer\'s right to access relevant personal information while
minimizing the delivery of information to a consumer that would not be
useful to the consumer, such as system log information and other
technical data. For delivery of the most sensitive personal information,
the regulations may require a higher standard of authentication,
provided that the agency shall monitor the impact of the higher standard
on the right of consumers to obtain their personal information to ensure
that the requirements of verification do not result in the unreasonable
denial of verifiable consumer requests.*

*(15) Issuing regulations requiring businesses whose processing of
consumers\' personal information presents significant risk to
consumers\' privacy or security, to:*

*(A) perform a cybersecurity audit on an annual basis, including
defining the scope of the audit and establishing a process to ensure
that audits are thorough and independent. The factors to be considered
in determining when processing may result in significant risk to the
security of personal information shall include the size and complexity
of the business and the nature and scope of processing activities,*

*(B) submit to the California Privacy Protection Agency on a regular
basis a risk assessment with respect to their processing of personal
information, including whether the processing involves sensitive
personal information, and identifying and weighing the benefits
resulting from the processing to the business, the consumer, other
stakeholders, and the public, against the potential risks to the rights
of the consumer associated with such processing, with the goal of
restricting or prohibiting such processing if the risks to privacy of
the consumer outweigh the benefits resulting from processing to the
consumer, the business, other stakeholders, and the public. Nothing in
this section shall require a business to divulge trade secrets.*

*(16) Issuing regulations governing access and opt-out rights with
respect to businesses\' use of automated decision-making technology,
including profiling and requiring businesses\' response to access
requests to include meaningful information about the logic involved in
such decision*

*­making processes, as well as a description of the likely outcome of
the process with respect to the consumer.*

*(17) Issuing regulations to further define a \"law enforcement
agency-approved investigation\" for purposes of the exception in
paragraph (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.145.*

*(18) Issuing regulations to define the scope and process for the
exercise of the agency\'s audit authority, to establish criteria for
selection of persons to audit, and to protect consumers\' personal
information from disclosure to an auditor, in the absence of a court
order, warrant, or subpoena.*

*(19)*

*(A) Issuing regulations to define the requirements and technical
specifications for an opt­out preference signal sent by a platform,
technology, or mechanism, to indicate a consumer\'s intent to opt-out of
the sale or sharing of the consumer\'s personal information and to limit
the use or disclosure of the consumer\'s sensitive personal information.
The requirements and specifications for the opt-out preference signal
should be updated from time to time to reflect the means by which
consumers interact with businesses, and should:*

*(i) ensure that the manufacturer of a platform or browser or device
that sends the opt-out preference signal cannot unfairly disadvantage
another business;*

*(ii) ensure that the opt-out preference signal is consumer1riendiy,
clearly described, and easy to use by an average consumer, and does not
require that the consumer provide additional information beyond what is
necessary;*

*(iii) clearly represent a consumer\'s intent and be free of defaults
constraining or presupposing such intent;*

*(iv) ensure that the opt-out preference signal does not conflict with
other commonly-used privacy settings or tools that consumers may employ;
*

*(v) provide a mechanism for the consumer to selectively consent to a
business's sale of the consumer\'s personal information, or the use or
disclosure of the consumer\'s sensitive personal information, without
affecting their preferences with respect to other businesses or
disabling the opt-out preference signal globally; and*

*(vi) state that in the case of a page or setting view which the
consumer accesses to set the opt-out preference signal, the consumer
should see up to three choices, including*

*(a) a global opt-out from sale and sharing of personal information,
including a direction to limit the use of sensitive personal
information;*

*(b) a choice to \"Limit The Use Of My Sensitive Personal Information\";
and*

*(c) a choice titled \"Do Not Sell/Do Not Share/Do Not Share My Personal
Information for Cross-Context Behavioral Advertising,\"*

*(B) Issuing regulations to establish technical specifications for an
opt-out preference signal that allows the consumer, or the consumer\'s
parent or guardian, to specify that the consumer is less than 13 years
of age or at least 13 years of age and less than 16 years of age.*

*(C) Issuing regulations, with the goal of strengthening consumer
privacy, while considering the legitimate operational interests of
businesses, to govern the use or disclosure of a consumer\'s sensitive
personal information, notwithstanding the consumer\'s direction to limit
the use or disclosure of the consumer\'s sensitive personal information,
including:*

*(i) determining any additional purposes for which a business may use or
disclose a consumer\'s sensitive personal information;*

*(ii) determining the scope of activities permitted under paragraph (8)
of subdivision (e) of Section 1798.140, as authorized by subdivision (a)
of Section 1798.121, to ensure that the activities do not involve
health-related research;*

*(iii) ensuring the functionality of the business\'s operations; and*

*(iv) ensuring that the exemption in subdivision (d) of Section 1798.121
or sensitive personal information applies to information that is
collected or processed incidentally, or without the purpose of inferring
characteristics about a consumer, while ensuring that businesses do not
use the exemption for the purpose of evading consumers\' rights to limit
the use and disclosure of their sensitive personal information under
Section 1798.121.*

*(20) Issuing regulations to govern how a business that has elected to
comply with subdivision (b) of Section 1798.135 responds to the opt-out
preference signal and provides consumers with the opportunity
subsequently to consent to the sale or sharing of their personal
information or the use and disclosure of their sensitive personal
information for purposes in addition to those authorized by subdivision
(a) of Section 1798.121. The regulations should:*

*(A) strive to promote competition and consumer choice and be technology
neutral;*

*(B) ensure that the business does not respond to an opt-out preference
signal by:*

*(i) intentionally degrading the functionality of the consumer
experience;*

*(ii) charging the consumer a fee in response to the consumer\'s opt-out
preferences;*

*(iii) making any products or services not function properly or fully
for the consumer, as compared to consumers who do not use the opt-out
preference signal;*

*(iv) attempting to coerce the consumer to opt-in to the sale or sharing
of their personal information, or the use or disclosure of their
sensitive personal information, by stating or implying that the use of
the opt-out preference signal will adversely affect the consumer as
compared to consumers who do not use the opt-out preference signal,
including stating or implying that the consumer will not be able to use
the business\'s products or services, or that such products or services
may not function properly or fully; or*

*(v) displaying any notification or pop-up in response to the
consumer\'s opt-out preference signal; and*

*(C) ensure that any link to a webpage or its supporting content that
allows the consumer to consent to opt-in:*

*(i) Is not part of a popup, notice, banner, or other intrusive design
that obscures any part of the webpage the consumer intended to visit
from full view, or that interferes with or impedes in any way the
consumer\'s experience visiting or browsing the webpage or website the
consumer intended to visit;*

*(ii) does not require or imply that the consumer must click the link to
receive full functionality of any products or services, including the
website;*

*(iii) does not make use of any dark patterns; and*

*(iv) applies only to the business with which the consumer intends to
interact. The regulation should strive to curb coercive or deceptive
practices in response to an opt-out preference signal but should not
unduly restrict businesses that are trying in good faith to comply with
Section 1798.135.*

*(21) Review existing California Insurance Code provisions and
regulations relating to consumer privacy, except those relating to
insurance rates or pricing, to determine whether any provisions of the
Insurance Code provide greater protection to consumers than the
provisions of this Title. Upon completing its review, the Agency shall
adopt a regulation that applies only the more protective provisions of
this Title to insurance companies. For the purpose of clarity, the
Insurance Commissioner shall have jurisdiction over insurance rates and
pricing.*

*(22) Harmonizing the regulations governing opt-out mechanisms, notices
to consumers, and other operational mechanisms in this title to promote
clarity and the functionality of this title for consumers.*

\(b) The Attorney General may adopt additional regulations as follows:

\(1) To establish rules and procedures on how to process and comply with
verifiable consumer requests for specific pieces of personal information
relating to a household in order to address obstacles to implementation
and privacy concerns.

\(2) As necessary to further the purposes of this title.

\(c) The Attorney General shall not bring an enforcement action under
this title until six months after the publication of the final
regulations issued pursuant to this section or July 1, 2020, whichever
is sooner.

*(d) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), the timeline for adopting final
regulations required by the Act adding this subdivision shall be July 1,
2022. Beginning the later of July 1, 2021, or six months after the
Agency provides notice to the Attorney General that It is prepared to
begin rulemaking under this title, the authority assigned to the
Attorney General to adopt regulations under this section shall be
exercised by the California Privacy Protection Agency. Notwithstanding
any other law, civil and administrative enforcement of the provisions of
law added or amended by this Act shall not commence until July 1, 2023,
and shall only apply to violations occurring on or after that date.
Enforcement of provisions of law contained in the California Consumer
Privacy Act of 2018 amended or reenacted by this Act shall remain In
effect and shall be enforceable until the same provisions of this Act
become enforceable.*

*SEC. 22. Section 1798.190 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.190. Anti-Avoidance*

1798.190

*A court or the Agency shall disregard the intermediate steps or
transactions for purposes of effectuating the purposes of this title:*

*(a)* If a series of steps or transactions were component parts of a
single transaction intended from the beginning to be taken with the
intention of avoiding the reach of this title, including the disclosure
of information by a business to a third party in order to avoid the
definition of sell *or share, or*

*(b) if steps or transactions were taken to purposely avoid the
definition of sell or share by eliminating any monetary or other
valuable consideration, including by entering into contracts that do not
include an exchange for monetary or other valuable consideration, but
where a party is obtaining something of value or use*~~, a court shall
disregard the intermediate steps or transactions for purposes of
effectuating the purposes of this title~~.

*SEC. 22. Section 1798.192 of the Civil Code is amended to read:*

*1798.192. Waiver*

1798.192

Any provision of a contract or agreement of any kind*, including a
representative action waiver,* that purports to waive or limit in any
way ~~a consumer's~~ rights under this title, including, but not limited
to, any right to a remedy or means of enforcement, shall be deemed
contrary to public policy and shall be void and unenforceable. This
section shall not prevent a consumer from declining to request
information from a business, declining to opt-out of a business's sale
of the consumer's personal information, or authorizing a business to
sell *or share* the consumer's personal information after previously
opting *-*out.

1798.194

This title shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes.

1798.196

This title is intended to supplement federal and state law, if
permissible, but shall not apply if such application is preempted by, or
in conflict with, federal law or the United States or California
Constitution.

1798.198

\(a) Subject to limitation provided in subdivision (b), and in Section
1798.199, this title shall be operative January 1, 2020.

\(b) This title shall become operative only if initiative measure No.
17-0039, The Consumer Right to Privacy Act of 2018, is withdrawn from
the ballot pursuant to Section 9604 of the Elections Code.

1798.199

Notwithstanding Section 1798.198, Section 1798.180 shall be operative on
the effective date of the act adding this section.

*SEC. 24. Section 1798.199.10 et seq. are added to the Civil Code to
read as follows:*

*Establishment of California Privacy Protection Agency*

*1798.199.10.*

*(a) There is hereby established in state government the California
Privacy Protection Agency, which is vested with full administrative
power, authority, and jurisdiction to implement and enforce the
Californla Consumer Privacy Act. The Agency shall be governed by a
five-member board, including the Chair. The Chair and one member of the
board shall be appointed by the Governor. The Attorney General, Senate
Rules Committee, and Speaker of the Assembly shall each appoint one
member. These appointments should be made from among Californians with
expertise in the areas of privacy, technology, and consumer rights.*

*(b) The initial appointments to the Agency shall be made within 90 days
of the effective date of the Act adding this section. 1798.199.15.
Members of the Agency board shall:*

*(a) have qualifications, experience and skills, in particular in the
areas of privacy and technology, required to perform the duties of the
Agency and exercise its powers;*

*(b) maintain the confidentiality of information which has come to their
knowledge in the course of the performance of their tasks or exercise of
their powers, except to the extent that disclosure is required by the
Public Records Act;*

*(c) remain free from external influence, whether direct or indirect,
and shall neither seek nor take instructions from another;*

*(d) refrain from any action incompatible with their duties and engaging
in any incompatible occupation, whether gainful or not, during their
term;*

*(e) have the right of access to all information made available by the
Agency to the Chair;*

*(f) be precluded, for a period of one year after leaving office, from
accepting employment with a business that was subject to an enforcement
action or civil action under this Title during the member\'s tenure or
during the five-year period preceding the member\'s appointment; and*

*(g) be precluded for a period of two years after leaving office, from
acting, for compensation, as an agent or attorney for, or otherwise
representing any other person in a matter pending before the Agency if
the purpose is to influence an action of the Agency.*

*1798.199.20.*

*Members of the Agency board, including the Chair, shall serve at the
pleasure of their appointing authority but shall serve for no longer
than eight consecutive years.*

*1798.199.25.*

*For each day on which they engage in official duties, members of the
Agency board shall be compensated at the rate of one hundred dollars
(\$100), adjusted biennially to reflect changes in the cost of living,
and shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred in performance of their
official duties.*

*1798.199.30.*

*The Agency board shall appoint an executive director who shall act in
accordance with Agency policies and regulations and with applicable law.
The Agency shall appoint and discharge officers, counsel, and employees,
consistent with applicable civil service laws, and shall fix the
compensation of employees and prescribe their duties. The Agency may
contract for services that cannot be provided by its employees.*

*1798.199.35.*

*The Agency board may delegate authority to the Chair or the executive
director to act in the name of the Agency between meetings of the
Agency, except with respect to resolution of enforcement actions and
rulemaking authority.*

*1798.199.40.*

*The Agency shall perform the following functions:*

*(a) Administer, implement, and enforce through administrative actions,
Title 1.81.5 (commencing with Section 1798.100) to Part 4 of Division 3
of the Civil Code.*

*(b) On and after the earlier of July l, 2021, or within six months of
the Agency providing the Attorney General with notice that it is
prepared to assume rulemaking responsibilities under this title, adopt,
amend, and rescind regulations pursuant to Section 1798.185 to carry out
the purposes and provisions of the California Consumer Privacy Act,
including regulations specifying record keeping requirements for
businesses to ensure compliance with this title.*

*(c) Through the implementation of this title, protect the fundamental
privacy rights of natural persons with respect to the use of their
personal information.*

*(d) Promote public awareness and understanding of the risks, rules,
responsibilities, safeguards, and rights in relation to the collection,
use, sale and disclosure of personal information, including the rights
of minors with respect to their own information, and provide a public
report summarizing the risk assessments filed with the Agency pursuant
to paragraph (15) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185 while ensuring
that data security is not compromised.*

*(e) Provide guidance to consumers regarding their rights under this
title.*

*(f) Provide guidance to businesses regarding their duties and
responsibilities under this title, and appoint a Chief Privacy Auditor
to conduct audits of businesses to ensure compliance with this title
pursuant to regulations adopted pursuant to paragraph (18) of
subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185.*

*(g) Provide technical assistance and advice to the Legislature, upon
request, with respect to privacy-related legislation.*

*(h) Monitor relevant developments relating to the protection of
personal information, and in particular, the development of information
and communication technologies and commercial practices.*

*(i) Cooperate with other agencies with jurisdiction over privacy laws
and with data processing authorities in California, other states,
territories, and countries to ensure consistent application of privacy
protections.*

*(j) Establish a mechanism pursuant to which persons doing business in
California that do not meet the definition of business set forth in
paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of subdivision (d) of section 1798.140 may
voluntarily certify that they are in compliance with this title, as set
forth in paragraph (4) of subdivision (d) of Section 1798.140, and make
a list of such entitles available to the public.*

*(k) Solicit, review, and approve applications for grants to the extent
funds are available pursuant to paragraph (2) of subdivision (b) of
Section 1798.160.*

*(l) Perform all other acts necessary or appropriate in the exercise of
its power, authority, and jurisdiction, and seek to balance the goals of
strengthening consumer privacy while giving attention to the impact on
businesses,*

*1798.199.45.*

*Upon the sworn complaint of any person or on its own initiative, the
Agency may investigate possible violations of this title relating to any
business, service provider, contractor, or person. The Agency may decide
not to investigate a complaint or decide to provide a business with a
time-period to cure the alleged violation. In making a decision not to
investigate or provide more time to cure, the Agency may consider:*

*(a) the lack of intent to violate this title; and*

*(b) voluntary efforts undertaken by the business, service provider,
contractor, or person to cure the alleged violation prior to being
notified by the Agency of the complaint. The Agency shall notify in
writing the person who mode the complaint of the action, if any, the
Agency has taken or plans to take on the complaint, together with the
reasons for such action or non-action.*

*1798.199.50.*

*No finding of probable cause to believe this title has been violated
shall be made by the Agency unless, at least 30 days prior to the
Agency\'s consideration of the alleged violation, the business, service
provider, contractor, or person alleged to have violated this title is
notified of the violation by service of process or registered mall with
return receipt requested, provided with a summary of the evidence, and
informed of their right to be present in person and represented by
counsel at any proceeding of the Agency held for the purpose of
considering whether probable cause exists for believing the person
violated this title. Notice to the alleged violator shall be deemed made
on the date of service, the date the registered mail receipt is signed,
or if the registered mail receipt is not signed, the date returned by
the post office. A proceeding held for the purpose of considering
probable cause shall be private unless the alleged violator flies with
the Agency a written request that the proceeding be public.*

*1798.199.55.*

*(a) When the Agency determines there is probable cause for believing
this title has been violated, it shall hold a hearing to determine if a
violation has or violations have occurred. Notice shall be given and the
hearing conducted in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act
(Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 11500), Part 1, Division 3, Title 2,
Government Code). The Agency shall have all the powers granted by that
chapter. If the Agency determines on the basis of the hearing conducted
pursuant to this subdivision that a violation or violations have
occurred, it shall issue an order that may require the violator to do
all or any of the following:*

*(1) Cease and desist violation of this title.*

*(2) Subject to Section 1798,155, pay an administrative fine of up to
two thousand five hundred dollars (\$2,500) for each vlolatlon, or up to
seven thousand five hundred dollars (\$7,500) for each intentional
violation and each violation involving the personal information of minor
consumers to the Consumer Privacy Fund within the General Fund of the
state. When the Agency determines that no violation has occurred, it
shall publish a declaration so stating.*

*(b) If two or more persons are responsible for any violation or
violations, they shall be jointly and severally liable.*

*1798.199.60.*

*Whenever the Agency rejects the decision of an administrative law judge
made pursuant to Section 11517 of the Government Code, the Agency shall
state the reasons in writing for rejecting the decision.*

*1798.199.65.*

*The Agency may subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance and
testimony, administer oaths and affirmations, take evidence and require
by subpoena the production of any books, papers, records or other items
material to the performance of the Agency\'s duties or exercise of its
powers, including but not limited to its power to audit a business\'s
compliance with this title.*

*1798.199.70.*

*No administrative action brought pursuant to this title alleging a
violation of any of the provisions of this title shall be commenced more
than five years after the date on which the violation occurred.*

*(a) The service of the probable cause hearing notice, as required by
Section 1798.199.50, upon the person alleged to have violated this title
shall constitute the commencement of the administrative action.*

*(b) If the person alleged to have violated this title engages in the
fraudulent concealment of his or her acts or identity, the five-year
period shall be tolled for the period of the concealment. For purposes
of this subdivision, "fraudulent concealment\" means the person knows of
material facts related to their duties under this title and knowingly
conceals them in performing or omitting to perform those duties, for the
purpose of defrauding the public of information to which it is entitled
under this title.*

*(c) If, upon being ordered by a superior court to produce any documents
sought by a subpoena in any administrative proceeding under this title,
the person alleged to have violated this title fails to produce
documents in response to the order by the date ordered to comply
therewith, the five-year period shall be tolled for the period of the
delay from the date of filing of the motion to compel until the date the
documents are produced.*

*1798.199.75.*

*(a) In addition to any other available remedies, the Agency may bring a
civil action and obtain a judgment in superior court for the purpose of
collecting any unpaid administrative fines imposed pursuant to this
title after exhaustion of judicial review of the Agency\'s action. The
action may be filed as a small claims, limited civil, or unlimited civil
case, depending on the jurisdictional amount. The venue for this action
shall be in the county where the administrative fines were imposed by
the Agency. In order to obtain a judgment in a proceeding under this
section, the Agency shall show, following the procedures and rules of
evidence as applied in ordinary civil actions, all of the following:*

*(1) That the administrative fines were imposed following the procedures
set forth in this title and implementing regulations.*

*(2) That the defendant or defendants in the action were notified, by
actual or constructive notice, of the imposition of the administrative
fines.*

*(3) That a demand for payment has been made by the Agency and full
payment has not been received.*

*(b) A civil action brought pursuant to subdivision (a) shall be
commenced within four years after the date on which the administrative
fines were imposed.*

*1798.199.80.*

*(a) If the time for judicial review of a final Agency order or decision
has lapsed, or if all means of judicial review of the order or decision
have been exhausted, the Agency may apply to the clerk of the court for
a judgment to collect the administrative fines imposed by the order or
decision, or the order as modified in accordance with a decision on
judicial review.*

*(b) The application, which shall include a certified copy of the order
or decision, or the order as modified in accordance with a decision on
judicial review, and proof of service of the order or decision,
constitutes a sufficient showing to warrant issuance of the judgment to
collect the administrative fines. The clerk of the court shall enter the
judgment immediately in conformity with the application.*

*(c) An application made pursuant to this section shall be made to the
clerk of the superior court in the county where the administrative fines
were imposed by the Agency.*

*(d) A judgment entered in accordance with this section has the same
force and effect as, and is subject to all the provisions of law
relating to, a judgment in a civil action and may be enforced in the
same manner as any other judgment of the court in which it is entered.*

*(e) The Agency may bring an application pursuant to this section only
within four years after the date on which all means of judicial review
of the order or decision have been exhausted.*

*(f) The remedy available under this section is in addition to those
available under any other law.*

*1798.199.85.*

*Any decision of the Agency with respect to a complaint or
administrative fine shall be subject to judicial review in an action
brought by an interested party to the complaint or administrative fine
and shall be subject to an abuse of discretion standard.*

*1798.199.90.*

*(a) Any business, service provider, contractor, or other person that
violates this title shall be subject to an injunction and liable for a
civil penalty of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars
(\$2,500) for each violation or seven thousand five hundred dollars
(\$7,500) for each intentional violation and each violation involving
the personal information of minor consumers, as adjusted pursuant to
paragraph (5) of subdivision (a) of Section 1798.185, which shall be
assessed and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the
people of the State of California by the Attorney General, The court may
consider the· good faith cooperation of the business, service provider,
contractor, or other person in determining the amount of the civil
penalty.*

*(b) Any civil penalty recovered by an action brought by the Attorney
General for a violation of this title, and the proceeds of any
settlement of any said action, shall be deposited in the Consumer
Privacy Fund.*

*(c) The Agency shall, upon request by the Attorney General, stay an
administrative action or investigation under this title to permit the
Attorney General to proceed with an investigation or civil action, and
shall not pursue an administrative action or investigation, unless the
Attorney General subsequently determines not to pursue an investigation
or civil action. The Agency may not limit the authority of the Attorney
General to enforce this title.*

*(d) No civil action may be filed by the Attorney General under this
Section for any violation of this title after the Agency has issued a
decision pursuant to Section 1798.199.85 or an order pursuant to Section
1798.199.55 against that person for the same violation.*

*(e) This section shall not affect the private right of action provided
for in Section 1798.150.*

*1798.199.95.*

*(a) There is hereby appropriated from the General Fund of the state to
the Agency the sum of five million dollars (\$5,000,000) during the
fiscal year 2020-2021, and the sum of ten million dollars (\$10,000,000)
adjusted for cost-of-living changes, during each fiscal year thereafter,
for expenditure to support the operations of the Agency pursuant to this
title. The expenditure of funds under this appropriation shall be
subject to the normal administrative review given to other state
appropriations. The Legislature shall appropriate such additional
amounts to the Commission and other agencies as may be necessary to
carry out the provisions of this title.*

*(b) The Department of Finance, in preparing the state budget and the
Budget Bill submitted to the Legislature, shall include an item for the
support of this title, which item shall indicate all of the following:*

*(1) the amounts to be appropriated to other agencies to carry out their
duties under this title, which amounts shall be in augmentation of the
support items of such agencies; and*

*(2) the additional amounts required to be appropriated by the
Legislature to the Agency to carry out the purposes of this title, as
provided for in this section; and*

*(3) in parentheses, for informational purposes, the continuing
appropriation during each fiscal year of ten million dollars
(\$10,000,000), adjusted for cost-of-living changes made pursuant to
this section.*

*(c) The Attorney General shall provide staff support to the Agency
until such time as the Agency has hired its own staff. The Attorney
General shall be reimbursed by the Agency for these services.*

*1798.199.100.*

*The Agency and any court, as applicable, shall consider the good faith
cooperation of the business, service provider, contractor, or other
person in determining the amount of any administrative fine or civil
penalty for a violation of this title. A business shall not be required
by the Agency, a court, or otherwise to pay both an administrative fine
and a civil penalty for the same violation.*

*SEC. 25. Amendment.*

*(a) The provisions of this Act may be amended after its approval by the
voters by a statute that is passed by a vote of a majority of the
members of each house of the Legislature and signed by the Governor,
provided that such amendments are consistent with and further the
purpose and intent of this Act as set forth in Section 3, including
amendments to the exemptions in Section 1798.145 if the laws upon which
the exemptions are based are amended to enhance privacy and are
consistent with and further the purposes and intent of this Act and
amendments to address a decision of a California state or federal court
holding that a provision of the Act is unconstitutional or preempted by
federal law, provided that any further amendments to legislation that
addresses a court holding shall be subject to this subdivision.*

*(b) Notwithstanding Section 1798.199.25, the Legislature may authorize
additional compensation for members of the California Consumer Privacy
Agency, if it determines that it is necessary to carry out the Agency\'s
functions, by a statute that is passed by a vote of a majority of the
members of each house of the Legislature and signed by the Governor.*

*(c) This section applies to all statutes amended or reenacted as part
of this Act, and all provisions of such statutes, regardless of whether
this Act makes any substantive change thereto.*

*(d) The provisions of this Act shall prevail over any conflicting
legislation enacted after January 1, 2020. Any amendments to this Act or
any legislation that conflicts with any provision of this Act shall be
null and void upon passage of this Act by the voters, regardless of the
code in which it appears. Legislation shall be considered
\"conflicting\" for purposes of this subdivision, unless the legislation
is consistent with and furthers the purpose and intent of this Act as
set forth in Section 3.*

*SEC. 26. Severability.*

*If any provision of this measure, or part of this measure, or the
application of any provision or part to any person or circumstances, is
for any reason held to be invalid, the remaining provisions, or
applications of provisions, shall not be affected, but shall remain in
full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this measure
are severable. If a court were to find in a final, unreviewable judgment
that the exclusion of one or more entities or activities from the
applicability of the Act renders the Act unconstitutional, those
exceptions should be severed and the Act should be made applicable to
the entities or activities formerly exempt from the Act. It is the
intent of the voters that this Act would have been enacted regardless of
whether any invalid provision had been included or any invalid
application had been made.*

*SEC. 27. Conflicting Initiatives.*

*(a) In the event that this measure and another measure addressing
consumer privacy shall appear on the same statewide ballot, the
provisions of the other measure or measures shall be deemed to be in
conflict with this measure. In the event that this measure receives a
greater number of affirmative votes than a measure deemed to be in
conflict with it, the provisions of this measure shall prevail ln their
entirety, and the other measure or measures shall be null and void.*

*(b) If this measure is approved by the voters but superseded by law by
any other conflicting measure approved by voters at the same election,
and the conflicting ballot measure is later held invalid, this measure
shall be self-executing and given full force and effect.*

*SEC. 28. Standing.*

*Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the State or any of its
officials fail to defend the constitutionality of this Act, following
its approval by the voters, any other government agency of this State
shall have the authority to intervene in any court action challenging
the constitutionality of this Act for the purpose of defending its
constitutionality, whether such action is in state or federal trial
court, on appeal, or on discretionary review by the Supreme Court of
California and/or the Supreme Court of the United States. The reasonable
fees and costs of defending the action shall be a charge on funds
appropriated to the California Department of Justice, which shall be
satisfied promptly.*

*SEC. 29. Construction.*

*This Act shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes.*

*SEC. 30. Savings Clause.*

*This Act is intended to supplement federal and state law, where
permissible, but shall not apply where such application is preempted by,
or in conflict with, federal law, or the California Constitution. The
provisions of the Act relating to children under 16 years of age shall
only apply to the extent not in conflict with Children\'s Online Privacy
Protection Act.*

*SEC. 31. Effective and Operative Dates.*

*(a) This Act shall become effective as provided in subdivision (a) of
section 10 of article II of the California Constitution. Except as
provided in subdivision (b), this Act shall become operative January 1,
2023, and with the exception of the right of access, shall only apply to
personal information collected by a business on or after January 1,
2022.*

*(b) Subdivisions (m) and (n) of Section 1798.145, Sections 1798.160,
1798.185, 1798.199.10 through 1798.199.40, and 1798.199.95, shall become
operative on the effective date of the Act.*

*(c) The provisions of the California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018,
amended or reenacted by this Act, shall remain in full force and effect
and shall be enforceable until the same provisions of this Act become
operative and enforceable.*
